FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 2 77
a more comfortable lifestyle than commoners? Kleptocrats throughout the
ages have resorted to a mixture of four solutions:
1. Disarm the populace, and arm the elite. That's much easier in these
days of high-tech weaponry, produced only in industrial plants and easily
monopolized by an elite, than in ancient times of spears and clubs easily
made at home.
2. Make the masses happy by redistributing much of the tribute
received, in popular ways. This principle was as valid for Hawaiian chiefs
as it is for American politicians today.
3. Use the monopoly of force to promote happiness, by maintaining
public order and curbing violence. This is potentially a big and underap
preciated advantage of centralized societies over noncentralized ones.
Anthropologists formerly idealized band and tribal societies as gentle and
nonviolent, because visiting anthropologists observed no murder in a band
of 25 people in the course of a three-year study. Of course they didn't: it's
easy to calculate that a band of a dozen adults and a dozen children, sub¬
ject to the inevitable deaths occurring anyway for the usual reasons other
than murder, could not perpetuate itself if in addition one of its dozen
adults murdered another adult every three years. Much more extensive
long-term information about band and tribal societies reveals that murder
is a leading cause of death. For example, I happened to be visiting New
Guinea's Iyau people at a time when a woman anthropologist was inter
viewing Iyau women about their life histories. Woman after woman, when
asked to name her husband, named several sequential husbands who had
died violent deaths. A typical answer went like this: "My first husband
was killed by Elopi raiders. My second husband was killed by a man who
wanted me, and who became my third husband. That husband was killed
by the brother of my second husband, seeking to avenge his murder." Such
biographies prove common for so-called gentle tribespeople and contrib
uted to the acceptance of centralized authority as tribal societies grew
larger.
4. The remaining way for kleptocrats to gain public support is to con
struct an ideology or religion justifying kleptocracy. Bands and tribes
already had supernatural beliefs, just as do modern established religions,
But the supernatural beliefs of bands and tribes did not serve to justify
central authority, justify transfer of wealth, or maintain peace between
unrelated individuals. When supernatural beliefs gained those functions
and became institutionalized, they were thereby transformed into what we