YALI'S QUESTION • 23
depended on large-scale irrigation systems that in turn required centralized
bureaucracies. This explanation was suggested by the undoubted fact that
the earliest known empires and writing systems arose in the Tigris and
Euphrates Valleys of the Fertile Crescent and in the Nile Valley of Egypt.
Water control systems also appear to have been associated with centralized
political organization in some other areas of the world, including the Indus
Valley of the Indian subcontinent, the Yellow and Yangtze Valleys of
China, the Maya lowlands of Mesoamerica, and the coastal desert of Peru.
However, detailed archaeological studies have shown that complex irri
gation systems did not accompany the rise of centralized bureaucracies but
followed after a considerable lag. That is, political centralization arose for
some other reason and then permitted construction of complex irrigation
systems. None of the crucial developments preceding political centraliza
tion in those same parts of the world were associated with river valleys or
with complex irrigation systems. For example, in the Fertile Crescent food
production and village life originated in hills and mountains, not in low
land river valleys. The Nile Valley remained a cultural backwater for about
3,000 years after village food production began to flourish in the hills of
the Fertile Crescent. River valleys of the southwestern United States even
tually came to support irrigation agriculture and complex societies, but
only after many of the developments on which those societies rested had
been imported from Mexico. The river valleys of southeastern Australia
remained occupied by tribal societies without agriculture.
Yet another type of explanation lists the immediate factors that enabled
Europeans to kill or conquer other peoples—especially European guns,
infectious diseases, steel tools, and manufactured products. Such an expla
nation is on the right track, as those factors demonstrably were directly
responsible for European conquests. However, this hypothesis is incom
plete, because it still offers only a proximate (first-stage) explanation iden
tifying immediate causes. It invites a search for ultimate causes: why were
Europeans, rather than Africans or Native Americans, the ones to end up
with guns, the nastiest germs, and steel?
While some progress has been made in identifying those ultimate causes
in the-case of Europe's conquest of the New World, Africa remains a big
puzzle. Africa is the continent where protohumans evolved for the longest
time, where anatomically modern humans may also have arisen, and
where native diseases like malaria and yellow fever killed European
explorers. If a long head start counts for anything, why didn't guns and