YALI'S QUESTION • I 7
Mexico, Peru, New Caledonia, the former Soviet Union, and parts of Indo
nesia—civil unrest or guerrilla warfare pits still-numerous indigenous pop
ulations against governments dominated by descendants of invading
conquerors. Many other indigenous populations—such as native Hawai¬
ians, Aboriginal Australians, native Siberians, and Indians in the United
States, Canada, Brazil, Argentina, and Chile—became so reduced in num
bers by genocide and disease that they are now greatly outnumbered by
the descendants of invaders. Although thus incapable of mounting a civil
war, they are nevertheless increasingly asserting their rights.
In addition to these current political and economic reverberations of
past collisions among peoples, there are current linguistic reverberations—
especially the impending disappearance of most of the modern world's
6,000 surviving languages, becoming replaced by English, Chinese, Rus
sian, and a few other languages whose numbers of speakers have increased
enormously in recent centuries. All these problems of the modern world
result from the different historical trajectories implicit in Yali's question.
BEFORE SEEKING ANSWERS to Yali's question, we should pause to
consider some objections to discussing it at all. Some people take offense
at the mere posing of the question, for several reasons.
One objection goes as follows. If we succeed in explaining how some
people came to dominate other people, may this not seem to justify the
domination? Doesn't it seem to say that the outcome was inevitable, and
that it would therefore be futile to try to change the outcome today? This
objection rests on a common tendency to confuse an explanation of causes
with a justification or acceptance of results. What use one makes of a his
torical explanation is a question separate from the explanation itself.
Understanding is more often used to try to alter an outcome than to repeat
or perpetuate it. That's why psychologists try to understand the minds of
murderers and rapists, why social historians try to understand genocide,
and why physicians try to understand the causes of human disease. Those
investigators do not seek to justify murder, rape, genocide, and illness.
instead, they seek to use their understanding of a chain of causes to inter-
rupt the chain.
Second, doesn't addressing Yali's question automatically involve a
Eurocentric approach to history, a glorification of western Europeans, and
an obsession with the prominence of western Europe and Europeanized