UP TO THE STARTING LINE • 49
15,000 years ago. It too now seems convincing to many archaeologists,
but caution is warranted in view of all the previous disillusionments.
If there really were pre-Clovis people in the Americas, why is it still so
hard to prove that they existed? Archaeologists have excavated hundreds
of American sites unequivocally dating to between 2000 and 11,000 B.C.,
including dozens of Clovis sites in the North American West, rock shelters
in the Appalachians, and sites in coastal California. Below all the archaeo
logical layers with undoubted human presence, at many of those same
sites, deeper older layers have been excavated and still yield undoubted
remains of animals—but with no further evidence of humans. The weak
nesses in pre-Clovis evidence in the Americas contrast with the strength of
the evidence in Europe, where hundreds of sites attest to the presence of
modern humans long before Clovis hunters appeared in the Americas
around 11,000 B.C. Even more striking is the evidence from Australia/
New Guinea, where there are barely one-tenth as many archaeologists as
in the United States alone, but where those few archaeologists have never
theless discovered over a hundred unequivocal pre-Clovis sites scattered
over the whole continent.
Early humans certainly didn't fly by helicopter from Alaska to Mead¬
owcroft and Monte Verde, skipping all the landscape in between. Advo
cates of pre-Clovis settlement suggest that, for thousands or even tens of
thousands of years, pre-Clovis humans remained at low population densi
ties or poorly visible archaeologically, for unknown reasons unprecedented
elsewhere in the world. I find that suggestion infinitely more implausible
than the suggestion that Monte Verde and Meadowcroft will eventually
be reinterpreted, as have other claimed pre-Clovis sites. My feeling is that,
if there really had been pre-Clovis settlement in the Americas, it would
have become obvious at many locations by now, and we would not still be
arguing. However, archaeologists remain divided on these questions.
The consequences for our understanding of later American prehistory
remain the same, whichever interpretation proves correct. Either: the
Americas were first settled around 11,000 B.C. and quickly filled up with
people. Or else: the first settlement occurred somewhat earlier (most advo
cates of pre-Clovis settlement would suggest by 15,000 or 20,000 years
ago, possibly 30,000 years ago, and few would seriously claim earlier);
but those pre-Clovis settlers remained few in numbers, or inconspicuous,
or had little impact, until around 11,000 B.C. In either case, of the five