YALI'S PEOPLE " 307
dreds of villages, fighting as fiercely with each other as with speakers of
other languages. Each of those microsocieties alone was far too small to
support chiefs and craft specialists, or to develop metallurgy and writing.
Besides a small and fragmented population, the other limitation on
development in New Guinea was geographic isolation, restricting the
inflow of technology and ideas from elsewhere. New Guinea's three neigh
bors were all separated from New Guinea by water gaps, and until a few
thousand years ago they were all even less advanced than New Guinea
(especially the New Guinea highlands) in technology and food production.
Of those three neighbors, Aboriginal Australians remained hunter-gather
ers with almost nothing to offer New Guineans that New Guineans did
not already possess. New Guinea's second neighbor was the much smaller
islands of the Bismarck and the Solomon Archipelagoes to the east. That
left, as New Guinea's third neighbor, the islands of eastern Indonesia. But
that area, too, remained a cultural backwater occupied by hunter-gather
ers for most of its history. There is no item that can be identified as having
reached New Guinea via Indonesia, after the initial colonization of New
Guinea over 40,000 years ago, until the time of the Austronesian expan
sion around 1600 B.C.
With that expansion, Indonesia became occupied by food producers of
Asian origins, with domestic animals, with agriculture and technology at
least as complex as New Guinea's, and with navigational skills that served
as a much more efficient conduit from Asia to New Guinea. Austronesians
settled on islands west and north and east of New Guinea, and in the far
west and on the north and southeast coasts of New Guinea itself. Aus
tronesians introduced pottery, chickens, and probably dogs and pigs to
New Guinea. (Early archaeological surveys claimed pig bones in the New
Guinea highlands by 4000 B.C., but those claims have not been confirmed.)
For at least the last thousand years, trade connected New Guinea to the
technologically much more advanced societies of Java and China. In return
for exporting bird of paradise plumes and spices, New Guineans received
Southeast Asian goods, including even such luxury items as Dong Son
bronze drums and Chinese porcelain.
With time, the Austronesian expansion would surely have had more
impact on New Guinea. Western New Guinea would eventually have been
incorporated politically into the sultanates of eastern Indonesia, and metal
tools might have spread through eastern Indonesia to New Guinea. But—
that hadn't happened by A.D. 1511, the year the Portuguese arrived in the