124 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
and barley and peas domesticated around 10,000 years ago, arose from
wild ancestors offering many advantages. They were already edible and
gave high yields in the wild. They were easily grown, merely by being sown
or planted. They grew quickly and could be harvested within a few months
of sowing, a big advantage for incipient farmers still on the borderline
between nomadic hunters and settled villagers. They could be readily
stored, unlike many later crops such as strawberries and lettuce. They were
mostly self-pollinating: that is, the crop varieties could pollinate them
selves and pass on their own desirable genes unchanged, instead of having
to hybridize with other varieties less useful to humans. Finally, their wild
ancestors required very little genetic change to be converted into crops—
for instance, in wheat, just the mutations for nonshattering stalks and uni
form quick germination.
A next stage of crop development included the first fruit and nut trees,
domesticated around 4000 B.C. They comprised olives, figs, dates, pome
granates, and grapes. Compared with cereals and legumes, they had the
drawback of not starting to yield food until at least three years after plant
ing, and not reaching full production until after as much as a decade. Thus,
growing these crops was possible only for people already fully committed
to the settled village life. However, these early fruit and nut trees were still
the easiest such crops to cultivate. Unlike later tree domesticates, they
could be grown directly by being planted as cuttings or even seeds. Cut
tings have the advantage that, once ancient farmers had found or devel
oped a productive tree, they could be sure that all its descendants would
remain identical to it.
A third stage involved fruit trees that proved much harder to cultivate,
including apples, pears, plums, and cherries. These trees cannot be grown
from cuttings. It's also a waste of effort to grow them from seed, since the
offspring even of an outstanding individual tree of those species are highly
variable and mostly yield worthless fruit. Instead, those trees must be
grown by the difficult technique of grafting, developed in China long after
the beginnings of agriculture. Not only is grafting hard work even once
you know the principle, but the principle itself could have been discovered
only through conscious experimentation. The invention of grafting was
hardly just a matter of some nomad relieving herself at a latrine and
returning later to be pleasantly surprised by the resulting crop of fine fruit.
Many of these late-stage fruit trees posed a further problem in that their
wild progenitors were the opposite of self-pollinating. They had to be