1 78 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
American California from the U.S. Southwest or to reach Australia from
New Guinea and Indonesia, and the failure of farming to spread from
South Africa's Natal Province to South Africa's Cape. Even among all
those areas where food production did spread in the prehistoric era, the
rates and dates of spread varied considerably. At the one extreme was its
rapid spread along east-west axes: from Southwest Asia both west to
Europe and Egypt and east to the Indus Valley (at an average rate of about
0.7 miles per year); and from the Philippines east to Polynesia (at 3.2 miles
per year). At the opposite extreme was its slow spread along north-south
axes: at less than 0.5 miles per year, from Mexico northward to the U.S.
Southwest; at less than 0.3 miles per year, for corn and beans from Mexico
northward to become productive in the eastern United States around A.D.
900; and at 0.2 miles per year, for the llama from Peru north to Ecuador.
These differences could be even greater if corn was not domesticated in
Mexico as late as 3500 B.C., as I assumed conservatively for these calcula
tions, and as some archaeologists now assume, but if it was instead domes
ticated considerably earlier, as most archaeologists used to assume (and
many still do).
There were also great differences in the completeness with which suites
of crops and livestock spread, again implying stronger or weaker barriers
to their spreading. For instance, while most of Southwest Asia's founder
crops and livestock did spread west to Europe and east to the Indus Valley,
neither of the Andes' domestic mammals (the llama / alpaca and the guinea
pig) ever reached Mesoamerica in pre-Columbian times. That astonishing
failure cries out for explanation. After all, Mesoamerica did develop dense
farming populations and complex societies, so there can be no doubt that
Andean domestic animals (if they had been available) would have been
valuable for food, transport, and wool. Except for dogs, Mesoamerica was
utterly without indigenous mammals to fill those needs. Some South Amer
ican crops nevertheless did succeed in reaching Mesoamerica, such as man
ioc, sweet potatoes, and peanuts. What selective barrier let those crops
through but screened out llamas and guinea pigs?
A subtler expression of this geographically varying ease of spread is the
phenomenon termed preemptive domestication. Most of the wild plant
species from which our crops were derived vary genetically from area to
area, because alternative mutations had become established among the
wild ancestral populations of different areas. Similarly, the changes
required to transform wild plants into crops can in principle be brought