7 8 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Throughout the Americas, diseases introduced with Europeans spread
from tribe to tribe far in advance of the Europeans themselves, killing an
estimated 95 percent of the pre-Columbian Native American population.
The most populous and highly organized native societies of North
America, the Mississippian chiefdoms, disappeared in that way between
1492 and the late 1600s, even before Europeans themselves made their
first settlement on the Mississippi River. A smallpox epidemic in 1713 was
the biggest single step in the destruction of South Africa's native San people
by European settlers. Soon after the British settlement of Sydney in 1788,
the first of the epidemics that decimated Aboriginal Australians began. A
well-documented example from Pacific islands is the epidemic that swept
over Fiji in 1806, brought by a few European sailors who struggled ashore
from the wreck of the ship Argo. Similar epidemics marked the histories
of Tonga, Hawaii, and other Pacific islands.
I do not mean to imply, however, that the role of disease in history was
confined to paving the way for European expansion. Malaria, yellow
fever, and other diseases of tropical Africa, India, Southeast Asia, and New
Guinea furnished the most important obstacle to European colonization
of those tropical areas.
How did Pizarro come to be at Cajamarca? Why didn't Atahuallpa
instead try to conquer Spain? Pizarro came to Cajamarca by means of
European maritime technology, which built the ships that took him across
the Atlantic from Spain to Panama, and then in the Pacific from Panama
to Peru. Lacking such technology, Atahuallpa did not expand overseas out
of South America.
In addition to the ships themselves, Pizarro's presence depended on the
centralized political organization that enabled Spain to finance, build,
staff, and equip the ships. The Inca Empire also had a centralized political
organization, but that actually worked to its disadvantage, because Pizarro
seized the Inca chain of command intact by capturing Atahuallpa. Since
the Inca bureaucracy was so strongly identified with its godlike absolute
monarch, it disintegrated after Atahuallpa's death. Maritime technology
coupled with political organization was similarly essential for European
expansions to other continents, as well as for expansions of many other
peoples.
A related factor bringing Spaniards to Peru was the existence of writing.
Spain possessed it, while the Inca Empire did not. Information could be
spread far more widely, more accurately, and in more detail by writing