218 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
had to settle on basic principles that we now take for granted. For exam
ple, they had to figure out how to decompose a continuous utterance into
speech units, regardless of whether those units were taken as words, sylla
bles, or phonemes. They had to learn to recognize the same sound or
speech unit through all our normal variations in speech volume, pitch,
speed, emphasis, phrase grouping, and individual idiosyncrasies of pro
nunciation. They had to decide that a writing system should ignore all
of that variation. They then had to devise ways to represent sounds by
symbols.
Somehow, the first scribes solved all those problems, without having in
front of them any example of the final result to guide their efforts. That
task was evidently so difficult that there have been only a few occasions
in history when people invented writing entirely on their own. The two
indisputably independent inventions of writing were achieved by the Su¬
merians of Mesopotamia somewhat before 3000 B.C. and by Mexican
Indians before 600 B.C. (Figure 12.1); Egyptian writing of 3000 B.C. and
Chinese writing (by 1300 B.C.) may also have arisen independently. Proba
bly all other peoples who have developed writing since then have bor
rowed, adapted, or at least been inspired by existing systems.
The independent invention that we can trace in greatest detail is histo
ry's oldest writing system, Sumerian cuneiform (Figure 12.1). For thou
sands of years before it jelled, people in some farming villages of the Fertile
Crescent had been using clay tokens of various simple shapes for account
ing purposes, such as recording numbers of sheep and amounts of grain.
In the last centuries before 3000 B.C., developments in accounting technol
ogy, format, and signs rapidly led to the first system of writing. One such
technological innovation was the use of flat clay tablets as a convenient
writing surface. Initially, the clay was scratched with pointed tools, which
gradually yielded to reed styluses for neatly pressing a mark into the tablet.
Developments in format included the gradual adoption of conventions
whose necessity is now universally accepted: that writing should be orga
nized into ruled rows or columns (horizontal rows for the Sumerians, as
for modern Europeans); that the lines should be read in a constant direc
tion (left to right for Sumerians, as for modern Europeans); and that the
lines should be read from top to bottom of the tablet rather than vice
versa.
But the crucial change involved the solution of the problem basic to