288 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
a temporary truce to come to the borders of their tiny territory in order to
exchange some trade items and brides with the next band. Such spatial
realities require that densely populated regions support large and com
plexly organized societies.
Considerations of conflict resolution, decision making, economics, and
space thus converge in requiring large societies to be centralized. But cen
tralization of power inevitably opens the door—for those who hold the
power, are privy to information, make the decisions, and redistribute the
goods—to exploit the resulting opportunities to reward themselves and
their relatives. To anyone familiar with any modern grouping of people,
that's obvious. As early societies developed, those acquiring centralized
power gradually established themselves as an elite, perhaps originating as
one of several formerly equal-ranked village clans that became "more
equal" than the others.
THOSE ARE THE reasons why large societies cannot function with band
organization and instead are complex kleptocracies. But we are still left
with the question of how small, simple societies actually evolve or amal
gamate into large, complex ones. Amalgamation, centralized conflict reso
lution, decision making, economic redistribution, and kleptocratic religion
don't just develop automatically through a Rousseauesque social contract.
What drives the amalgamation?
In part, the answer depends upon evolutionary reasoning. I said at the
outset of this chapter that societies classified in the same category are not
all identical to each other, because humans and human groups are infi
nitely diverse. For example, among bands and tribes, the big-men of some
are inevitably more charismatic, powerful, and skilled in reaching deci
sions than the big-men of others. Among large tribes, those with stronger
big-men and hence greater centralization tend to have an advantage over
those with less centralization. Tribes that resolve conflicts as poorly as did
the Fayu tend to blow apart again into bands, while ill-governed chief
doms blow apart into smaller chiefdoms or tribes. Societies with effective
conflict resolution, sound decision making, and harmonious economic
redistribution can develop better technology, concentrate their military
power, seize larger and more productive territories, and crush autonomous
smaller societies one by one.
Thus, competition between societies at one level of complexity tends to