42.4 * EPILOGUE
tle Ice Age of A.D. 1300-1500 contributed to the extinction of the Green
land Norse, but no historian, and probably not even a modern cli¬
matologist, could have predicted the Little Ice Age.
THUS, THE DIFFICULTIES historians face in establishing cause-and-
effect relations in the history of human societies are broadly similar to
the difficulties facing astronomers, climatologists, ecologists, evolutionary
biologists, geologists, and paleontologists. To varying degrees, each of
these fields is plagued by the impossibility of performing replicated, con
trolled experimental interventions, the complexity arising from enormous
numbers of variables, the resulting uniqueness of each system, the conse
quent impossibility of formulating universal laws, and the difficulties of
predicting emergent properties and future behavior. Prediction in history,
as in other historical sciences, is most feasible on large spatial scales and
over long times, when the unique features of millions of small-scale brief
events become averaged out. Just as I could predict the sex ratio of the
next 1,000 newborns but not the sexes of my own two children, the histo
rian can recognize factors that made inevitable the broad outcome of the
collision between American and Eurasian societies after 13,000 years of
separate developments, but not the outcome of the 1960 U.S. presidential
election. The details of which candidate said what during a single televised
debate in October 1960 could have given the electoral victory to Nixon
instead of to Kennedy, but no details of who said what could have blocked
the European conquest of Native Americans.
How can students of human history profit from the experience of scien
tists in other historical sciences? A methodology that has proved useful
involves the comparative method and so-called natural experiments. While
neither astronomers studying galaxy formation nor human historians can
manipulate their systems in controlled laboratory experiments, they both
can take advantage of natural experiments, by comparing systems dif
fering in the presence or absence (or in the strong or weak effect) of some
putative causative factor. For example, epidemiologists, forbidden to feed
large amounts of salt to people experimentally, have still been able to iden
tify effects of high salt intake by comparing groups of humans who already
differ greatly in their salt intake; and cultural anthropologists, unable to
provide human groups experimentally with varying resource abundances
for many centuries, still study long-term effects of resource abundance on