406 • EPILOGUE
ancestral peoples either ended up extinct, or returned to living as hunter-
gatherers, or went on to build complex states, depending on their environ
ments. Similarly, Aboriginal Australian hunter-gatherers, variously trans
planted to Flinders Island, Tasmania, or southeastern Australia, ended up
extinct, or as hunter-gatherers with the modern world's simplest technol
ogy, or as canal builders intensively managing a productive fishery,
depending on their environments.
Of course, the continents differ in innumerable environmental features
affecting trajectories of human societies. But a mere laundry list of every
possible difference does not constitute an answer to Yali's question. Just
four sets of differences appear to me to be the most important ones.
The first set consists of continental differences in the wild plant and
animal species available as starting materials for domestication. That's
because food production was critical for the accumulation of food sur
pluses that could feed non-food-producing specialists, and for the buildup
of large populations enjoying a military advantage through mere numbers
even before they had developed any technological or political advantage.
For both of those reasons, all developments of economically complex,
socially stratified, politically centralized societies beyond the level of small
nascent chiefdoms were based on food production.
But most wild animal and plant species have proved unsuitable for
domestication: food production has been based on relatively few species
of livestock and crops. It turns out that the number of wild candidate
species for domestication varied greatly among the continents, because of
differences in continental areas and also (in the case of big mammals) in
Late Pleistocene extinctions. These extinctions were much more severe in
Australia and the Americas than in Eurasia or Africa. As a result, Africa
ended up biologically somewhat less well endowed than the much larger
Eurasia, the Americas still less so, and Australia even less so, as did Yali's
New Guinea (with one-seventieth of Eurasia's area and with all of its origi
nal big mammals extinct in the Late Pleistocene).
On each continent, animal and plant domestication was concentrated
in a few especially favorable homelands accounting for only a small frac
tion of the continent's total area. In the case of technological innovations
and political institutions as well, most societies acquire much more from
other societies than they invent themselves. Thus, diffusion and migration
within a continent contribute importantly to the development of its socie
ties, which tend in the long run to share each other's developments (insofar