NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 241
to clay without ink. However, those next efforts did not appear until 2,500
years later in China and 3,100 years later in medieval Europe. Why was
the disk's precocious technology not widely adopted in Crete or elsewhere
in the ancient Mediterranean? Why was its printing method invented
around 1700 B.C. in Crete and not at some other time in Mesopotamia,
Mexico, or any other ancient center of writing? Why did it then take thou
sands of years to add the ideas of ink and a press and arrive at a printing
press? The disk thus constitutes a threatening challenge to historians. If
inventions are as idiosyncratic and unpredictable as the disk seems to sug
gest, then efforts to generalize about the history of technology may be
doomed from the outset.
Technology, in the form of weapons and transport, provides the direct
means by which certain peoples have expanded their realms and con
quered other peoples. That makes it the leading cause of history's broadest
pattern. But why were Eurasians, rather than Native Americans or sub-
Saharan Africans, the ones to invent firearms, oceangoing ships, and steel
equipment? The differences extend to most other significant technological
advances, from printing presses to glass and steam engines. Why were all
those inventions Eurasian? Why were all New Guineans and Native Aus
tralians in A.D. 1800 still using stone tools like ones discarded thousands
of years ago in Eurasia and most of Africa, even though some of the
world's richest copper and iron deposits are in New Guinea and Australia,
respectively? All those facts explain why so many laypeople assume that
Eurasians are superior to other peoples in inventiveness and intelligence.
If, on the other hand, no such difference in human neurobiology exists
to account for continental differences in technological development, what
does account for them? An alternative view rests on the heroic theory of
invention. Technological advances seem to come disproportionately from
a few very rare geniuses, such as Johannes Gutenberg, James Watt,
Thomas Edison, and the Wright brothers. They were Europeans, or
descendants of European emigrants to America. So were Archimedes and
other rare geniuses of ancient times. Could such geniuses have equally well
been born in Tasmania or Namibia? Does the history of technology
depend on nothing more than accidents of the birthplaces of a few inven
tors?
Still another alternative view holds that it is a matter not of individual
inventiveness but of the receptivity of whole societies to innovation. Some
societies seem hopelessly conservative, inward looking, and hostile to