102 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
In Egypt it seems likely that the former happened: local hunter-gather
ers simply added Southwest Asian domesticates and farming and herding
techniques to their own diet of wild plants and animals, then gradually
phased out the wild foods. That is, what arrived to launch food production
in Egypt was foreign crops and animals, not foreign peoples. The same
may have been true on the Atlantic coast of Europe, where local hunter-
gatherers apparently adopted Southwest Asian sheep and cereals over the
course of many centuries. In the Cape of South Africa the local Khoi
hunter-gatherers became herders (but not farmers) by acquiring sheep and
cows from farther north in Africa (and ultimately from Southwest Asia).
Similarly, Native American hunter-gatherers of the U.S. Southwest gradu
ally became farmers by acquiring Mexican crops. In these four areas the
onset of food production provides little or no evidence for the domestica
tion of local plant or animal species, but also little or no evidence for the
replacement of human population.
At the opposite extreme are regions in which food production certainly
began with an abrupt arrival of foreign people as well as of foreign crops
and animals. The reason why we can be certain is that the arrivals took
place in modern times and involved literate Europeans, who described in
innumerable books what happened. Those areas include California, the
Pacific Northwest of North America, the Argentine pampas, Australia,
and Siberia. Until recent centuries, these areas were still occupied by
hunter-gatherers—Native Americans in the first three cases and Aboriginal
Australians or Native Siberians in the last two. Those hunter-gatherers
were killed, infected, driven out, or largely replaced by arriving European
farmers and herders who brought their own crops and did not domesticate
any local wild species after their arrival (except for macadamia nuts in
Australia). In the Cape of South Africa the arriving Europeans found not
only Khoi hunter-gatherers but also Khoi herders who already possessed
only domestic animals, not crops. The result was again the start of farming
dependent on crops from elsewhere, a failure to domesticate local species,
and a massive modern replacement of human population.
Finally, the same pattern of an abrupt start of food production depen
dent on domesticates from elsewhere, and an abrupt and massive popula
tion replacement, seems to have repeated itself in many areas in the
prehistoric era. In the absence of written records, the evidence of those
prehistoric replacements must be sought in the archaeological record or
inferred from linguistic evidence. The best-attested cases are ones in which