UP TO THE STARTING LINE • 43
not imposed protective measures quickly. On other recently discovered
islands where protective measures did not go into effect quickly, extermi
nations did indeed result: one such victim, the dodo of Mauritius, has
become virtually a symbol for extinction. We also know now that, on
every one of the well-studied oceanic islands colonized in the prehistoric
era, human colonization led to an extinction spasm whose victims
included the moas of New Zealand, the giant lemurs of Madagascar, and
the big flightless geese of Hawaii. Just as modern humans walked up to
unafraid dodos and island seals and killed them, prehistoric humans pre
sumably walked up to unafraid moas and giant lemurs and killed them
too.
Hence one hypothesis for the demise of Australia's and New Guinea's
giants is that they met the same fate around 40,000 years ago. In contrast,
most big mammals of Africa and Eurasia survived into modern times,
because they had coevolved with protohumans for hundreds of thousands
or millions of years. They thereby enjoyed ample time to evolve a fear of
humans, as our ancestors' initially poor hunting skills slowly improved.
The dodo, moas, and perhaps the giants of Australia / New Guinea had
the misfortune suddenly to be confronted, without any evolutionary prep
aration, by invading modern humans possessing fully developed hunting
skills.
However, the overkill hypothesis, as it is termed, has not gone unchal
lenged for Australia / New Guinea. Critics emphasize that, as yet, no one
has documented the bones of an extinct Australian / New Guinean giant
with compelling evidence of its having been killed by humans, or even
of its having lived in association with humans. Defenders of the overkill
hypothesis reply: you would hardly expect to find kill sites if the extermi
nation was completed very quickly and long ago, such as within a few
millennia some 40,000 years ago. The critics respond with a counterthe¬
ory: perhaps the giants succumbed instead to a change in climate, such as
a severe drought on the already chronically dry Australian continent. The
debate goes on.
Personally, I can't fathom why Australia's giants should have survived
innumerable droughts in their tens of millions of years of Australian his
tory, and then have chosen to drop dead almost simultaneously (at least
on a time scale of millions of years) precisely and just coincidentally when
the first humans arrived. The giants became extinct not only in dry central
Australia but also in drenching wet New Guinea and southeastern Austra-