1 4 2. • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
anced biological package for intensive food production. That package
comprised three cereals, as the main carbohydrate sources; four pulses,
with 20-25 percent protein, and four domestic animals, as the main pro
tein sources, supplemented by the generous protein content of wheat; and
flax as a source of fiber and oil (termed linseed oil: flax seeds are about 40
percent oil). Eventually, thousands of years after the beginnings of animal
domestication and food production, the animals also began to be used for
milk, wool, plowing, and transport. Thus, the crops and animals of the
Fertile Crescent's first farmers came to meet humanity's basic economic
needs: carbohydrate, protein, fat, clothing, traction, and transport.
A final advantage of early food production in the Fertile Crescent is that
it may have faced less competition from the hunter-gatherer lifestyle than
that in some other areas, including the western Mediterranean. Southwest
Asia has few large rivers and only a short coastline, providing relatively
meager aquatic resources (in the form of river and coastal fish and shell
fish). One of the important mammal species hunted for meat, the gazelle,
originally lived in huge herds but was overexploited by the growing human
population and reduced to low numbers. Thus, the food production pack
age quickly became superior to the hunter-gatherer package. Sedentary
villages based on cereals were already in existence before the rise of food
production and predisposed those hunter-gatherers to agriculture and
herding. In the Fertile Crescent the transition from hunting-gathering to
food production took place relatively fast: as late as 9000 B.C. people still
had no crops and domestic animals and were entirely dependent on wild
foods, but by 6000 B.C. some societies were almost completely dependent
on crops and domestic animals.
The situation in Mesoamerica contrasts strongly: that area provided
only two domesticable animals (the turkey and the dog), whose meat yield
was far lower than that of cows, sheep, goats, and pigs; and corn, Meso¬
america's staple grain, was, as I've already explained, difficult to domesti
cate and perhaps slow to develop. As a result, domestication may not have
begun in Mesoamerica until around 3500 B.c. (the date remains very
uncertain); those first developments were undertaken by people who were
still nomadic hunter-gatherers; and settled villages did not arise there until
around 1500 B.C.
IN ALL THIS discussion of the Fertile Crescent's advantages for the early
rise of food production, we have not had to invoke any supposed advan-