2 46 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
invented to meet a foreseen need. These conclusions surely apply with
much greater force to the undocumented history of ancient technology.
When Ice Age hunter-gatherers noticed burned sand and limestone resi
dues in their hearths, it was impossible for them to foresee the long, seren
dipitous accumulation of discoveries that would lead to the first Roman
glass windows (around A.D. 1), by way of the first objects with surface
glazes (around 4000 B.c.), the first free-standing glass objects of Egypt and
Mesopotamia (around 2500 B.c.), and the first glass vessels (around 1500
B.C.).
We know nothing about how those earliest known surface glazes them
selves were developed. Nevertheless, we can infer the methods of prehis
toric invention by watching technologically "primitive" people today, such
as the New Guineans with whom I work. I already mentioned their knowl
edge of hundreds of local plant and animal species and each species' edibil
ity, medical value, and other uses. New Guineans told me similarly about
dozens of rock types in their environment and each type's hardness, color,
behavior when struck or flaked, and uses. All of that knowledge is
acquired by observation and by trial and error. I see that process of
"invention" going on whenever I take New Guineans to work with me in
an area away from their homes. They constantly pick up unfamiliar things
in the forest, tinker with them, and occasionally find them useful enough
to bring home. I see the same process when I am abandoning a campsite,
and local people come to scavenge what is left. They play with my dis
carded objects and try to figure out whether they might be useful in New
Guinea society. Discarded tin cans are easy: they end up reused as contain
ers. Other objects are tested for purposes very different from the one for
which they were manufactured. How would that yellow number 2 pencil
look as an ornament, inserted through a pierced ear-lobe or nasal septum?
Is that piece of broken glass sufficiently sharp and strong to be useful as a
knife? Eureka!
The raw substances available to ancient peoples were natural materials
such as stone, wood, bone, skins, fiber, clay, sand, limestone, and minerals,
all existing in great variety. From those materials, people gradually learned
to work particular types of stone, wood, and bone into tools; to convert
particular clays into pottery and bricks; to convert certain mixtures of
sand, limestone, and other "dirt" into glass; and to work available pure
soft metals such as copper and gold, then to extract metals from ores, and
finally to work hard metals such as bronze and iron.