FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 291
cessors strengthened the resulting embryonic Zulu state by expanding its
judicial system, policing, and ceremonies.
This Zulu example of a state formed by conquest can be multiplied
almost indefinitely. Native states whose formation from chiefdoms hap
pened to be witnessed by Europeans in the 18th and 19th centuries include
the Polynesian Hawaiian state, the Polynesian Tahitian state, the Merina
state of Madagascar, Lesotho and Swazi and other southern African states
besides that of the Zulus, the Ashanti state of West Africa, and the Ankole
and Buganda states of Uganda. The Aztec and Inca Empires were formed
by 15th-century conquests, before Europeans arrived, but we know much
about their formation from Indian oral histories transcribed by early Span
ish settlers. The formation of the Roman state and the expansion of the
Macedonian Empire under Alexander were described in detail by contem
porary classical authors.
All these examples illustrate that wars, or threats of war, have played a
key role in most, if not all, amalgamations of societies. But wars, even
between mere bands, have been a constant fact of human history. Why is
it, then, that they evidently began causing amalgamations of societies only
within the past 13,000 years? We had already concluded that the forma
tion of complex societies is somehow linked to population pressure, so we
should now seek a link between population pressure and the outcome of
war. Why should wars tend to cause amalgamations of societies when
populations are dense but not when they are sparse? The answer is that the
fate of defeated peoples depends on population density, with three possible
outcomes:
Where population densities are very low, as is usual in regions occupied
by hunter-gatherer bands, survivors of a defeated group need only move
farther away from their enemies. That tends to be the result of wars
between nomadic bands in New Guinea and the Amazon.
Where population densities are moderate, as in regions occupied by
food-producing tribes, no large vacant areas remain to which survivors of
a defeated band can flee. But tribal societies without intensive food pro
duction have no employment for slaves and do not produce large enough
food surpluses to be able to yield much tribute. Hence the victors have no
use for survivors of a defeated tribe, unless to take the women in marriage.
The defeated men are killed, and their territory may be occupied by the
victors.