HOW AFRICA BECAME BLACK • 3 83
Concealed at the top of Figure 19.2 is our first surprise, a big shock for
Eurocentric believers in the superiority of so-called Western civilization.
We're taught that Western civilization originated in the Near East, was
brought to brilliant heights in Europe by the Greeks and Romans, and
produced three of the world's great religions: Christianity, Judaism, and
Islam. Those religions arose among peoples speaking three closely related
languages, termed Semitic languages: Aramaic (the language of Christ and
the Apostles), Hebrew, and Arabic, respectively. We instinctively associate
Semitic peoples with the Near East.
However, Greenberg determined that Semitic languages really form
only one of six or more branches of a much larger language family, Afro-
asiatic, all of whose other branches (and other 222 surviving languages)
are confined to Africa. Even the Semitic subfamily itself is mainly African,
12 of its 19 surviving languages being confined to Ethiopia. This suggests
that Afroasiatic languages arose in Africa, and that only one branch of
them spread to the Near East. Hence it may have been Africa that gave
birth to the languages spoken by the authors of the Old and New Testa
ments and the Koran, the moral pillars of Western civilization.
The next surprise in Figure 19.2 is a seeming detail on which I didn't
comment when I just told you that distinct peoples tend to have distinct
languages. Among Africa's five groups of people—blacks, whites, Pygmies,
Khoisan, and Indonesians—only the Pygmies lack any distinct languages:
each band of Pygmies speaks the same language as the neighboring group
of black farmers. However, if one compares a given language as spoken
by Pygmies with the same language as spoken by blacks, the Pygmy ver
sion seems to contain some unique words with distinctive sounds.
Originally, of course, people as distinctive as the Pygmies, living in a
place as distinctive as the equatorial African rain forest, were surely iso
lated enough to develop their own language family. However, today those
languages are gone, and we already saw from Figure 19.1 that the Pyg
mies' modern distribution is highly fragmented. Thus, distributional and
linguistic clues combine to suggest that the Pygmy homeland was engulfed
by invading black farmers, whose languages the remaining Pygmies
adopted, leaving only traces of their original languages in some words and
sounds. We saw previously that much the same is true of the Malaysian
Negritos (Semang) and Philippine Negritos, who adopted Austroasiatic
and Austronesian languages, respectively, from the farmers who came to
surround them.