180 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
more subtle evidence that crops spread more easily out of Southwest Asia
than in the Americas.
Rapid spread of a crop may preempt domestication not only of the same
wild ancestral species somewhere else but also of related wild species. If
you're already growing good peas, it's of course pointless to start from
scratch to domesticate the same wild ancestral pea again, but it's also
pointless to domesticate closely related wild pea species that for farmers
are virtually equivalent to the already domesticated pea species. All of
Southwest Asia's founder crops preempted domestication of any of their
close relatives throughout the whole expanse of western Eurasia. In con
trast, the New World presents many cases of equivalent and closely re
lated, but nevertheless distinct, species having been domesticated in Meso
america and South America. For instance, 95 percent of the cotton grown
in the world today belongs to the cotton species Gossypium hirsutum,
which was domesticated in prehistoric times in Mesoamerica. However,
prehistoric South American farmers instead grew the related cotton Gos
sypium barbadense. Evidently, Mesoamerican cotton had such difficulty
reaching South America that it failed in the prehistoric era to preempt the
domestication of a different cotton species there (and vice versa). Chili
peppers, squashes, amaranths, and chenopods are other crops of which
different but related species were domesticated in Mesoamerica and South
America, since no species was able to spread fast enough to preempt the
others.
We thus have many different phenomena converging on the same con
clusion: that food production spread more readily out of Southwest Asia
than in the Americas, and possibly also than in sub-Saharan Africa. Those
phenomena include food production's complete failure to reach some eco
logically suitable areas; the differences in its rate and selectivity of spread;
and the differences in whether the earliest domesticated crops preempted
redomestications of the same species or domestications of close relatives.
What was it about the Americas and Africa that made the spread of food
production more difficult there than in Eurasia?
To ANSWER THIS question, let's begin by examining the rapid spread
of food production out of Southwest Asia (the Fertile Crescent). Soon after
food production arose there, somewhat before 8000 B.C., a centrifugal
wave of it appeared in other parts of western Eurasia and North Africa