THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE • 419
the abundance of homophones in the Chinese language may have had a
large impact on the role of literacy in Chinese society, yet it seems unlikely
that there was anything in the Chinese environment selecting for a lan
guage rich in homophones. Did a linguistic or cultural factor account for
the otherwise puzzling failure of complex Andean civilizations to develop
writing? Was there anything about India's environment predisposing
toward rigid socioeconomic castes, with grave consequences for the devel
opment of technology in India? Was there anything about the Chinese
environment predisposing toward Confucian philosophy and cultural con
servatism, which may also have profoundly affected history? Why was
proselytizing religion (Christianity and Islam) a driving force for coloniza
tion and conquest among Europeans and West Asians but not among Chi
nese?
These examples illustrate the broad range of questions concerning cul
tural idiosyncrasies, unrelated to environment and initially of little signifi
cance, that might evolve into influential and long-lasting cultural features.
Their significance constitutes an important unanswered question. It can
best be approached by concentrating attention on historical patterns that
remain puzzling after the effects of major environmental factors have been
taken into account.
WHAT ABOUT THE effects of idiosyncratic individual people? A famil
iar modern example is the narrow failure, on July 20, 1944, of the assassi
nation attempt against Hitler and of a simultaneous uprising in Berlin.
Both had been planned by Germans who were convinced that the war
could not be won and who wanted to seek peace then, at a time when the
eastern front between the German and Russian armies still lay mostly
within Russia's borders. Hitler was wounded by a time bomb in a briefcase
placed under a conference table; he might have been killed if the case had
been placed slightly closer to the chair where he was sitting. It is likely that
the modern map of Eastern Europe and the Cold War's course would have
been significantly different if Hitler had indeed been killed and if World
War II had ended then.
Less well known but even more fateful was a traffic accident in the
summer of 1930, over two years before Hitler's seizure of power in Ger
many, when a car in which he was riding in the "death seat" (right front
passenger seat) collided with a heavy trailer truck. The truck braked just