3 94 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Bantu farmers from West Africa's inland savanna south into its wetter
coastal forest may have begun as early as 3000 B.c. (Figure 19.4). Words
still widespread in all Bantu languages show that, already then, the Bantu
had cattle and wet-climate crops such as yams, but that they lacked metal
and were still engaged in much fishing, hunting, and gathering. They even
lost their cattle to disease borne by tsetse flies in the forest. As they spread
into the Congo Basin's equatorial forest zone, cleared gardens, and
increased in numbers, they began to engulf the Pygmy hunter-gatherers
and compress them into the forest itself.
By soon after 1000 B.C. the Bantu had emerged from the eastern side of
the forest into the more open country of East Africa's Rift Valley and Great
Lakes. Here they encountered a melting pot of Afroasiatic and Nilo¬
Saharan farmers and herders growing millet and sorghum and raising live
stock in drier areas, along with Khoisan hunter-gatherers. Thanks to their
wet-climate crops inherited from their West African homeland, the Bantu
were able to farm in wet areas of East Africa unsuitable for all those previ
ous occupants. By the last centuries B.C. the advancing Bantu had reached
the East African coast.
In East Africa the Bantu began to acquire millet and sorghum (along
with the Nilo-Saharan names for those crops), and to reacquire cattle,
from their Nilo-Saharan and Afroasiatic neighbors. They also acquired
iron, which had just begun to be smelted in Africa's Sahel zone. The origins
of ironworking in sub-Saharan Africa soon after 1000 B.C. are still
unclear. That early date is suspiciously close to dates for the arrival of
Near Eastern ironworking techniques in Carthage, on the North African
coast. Hence historians often assume that knowledge of metallurgy
reached sub-Saharan Africa from the north. On the other hand, copper
smelting had been going on in the West African Sahara and Sahel since at
least 2000 B.C. That could have been the precursor to an independent Afri
can discovery of iron metallurgy. Strengthening that hypothesis, the iron-
smelting techniques of smiths in sub-Saharan Africa were so different from
those of the Mediterranean as to suggest independent development: Afri
can smiths discovered how to produce high temperatures in their village
furnaces and manufacture steel over 2,000 years before the Bessemer fur
naces of 19th-century Europe and America.
With the addition of iron tools to their wet-climate crops, the Bantu
had finally put together a military-industrial package that was unstoppable
in the subequatorial Africa of the time. In East Africa they still had to