TO FARM OR NOT TO FARM • 105
herders, who constitute the great majority of the world's actual food pro
ducers, aren't necessarily better off than hunter-gatherers. Time budget
studies show that they may spend more rather than fewer hours per day
at work than hunter-gatherers do. Archaeologists have demonstrated that
the first farmers in many areas were smaller and less well nourished, suf
fered from more serious diseases, and died on the average at a younger age
than the hunter-gatherers they replaced. If those first farmers could have
foreseen the consequences of adopting food production, they might not
have opted to do so. Why, unable to foresee the result, did they neverthe
less make that choice?
There exist many actual cases of hunter-gatherers who did see food
production practiced by their neighbors, and who nevertheless refused to
accept its supposed blessings and instead remained hunter-gatherers. For
instance, Aboriginal hunter-gatherers of northeastern Australia traded for
thousands of years with farmers of the Torres Strait Islands, between Aus
tralia and New Guinea. California Native American hunter-gatherers
traded with Native American farmers in the Colorado River valley. In
addition, Khoi herders west of the Fish River of South Africa traded with
Bantu farmers east of the Fish River, and continued to dispense with farm
ing themselves. Why?
Still other hunter-gatherers in contact with farmers did eventually
become farmers, but only after what may seem to us like an inordinately
long delay. For example, the coastal peoples of northern Germany did not
adopt food production until 1,300 years after peoples of the Linearband-
keramik culture introduced it to inland parts of Germany only 125 miles
to the south. Why did those coastal Germans wait so long, and what led
them finally to change their minds?
BEFORE WE CAN answer these questions, we must dispel some miscon
ceptions about the origins of food production and then reformulate the
question. What actually happened was not a discovery of food production,
nor an invention, as we might first assume. There was often not even a
conscious choice between food production and hunting-gathering. Spe
cifically, in each area of the globe the first people who adopted food pro
duction could obviously not have been making a conscious choice or
consciously striving toward farming as a goal, because they had never seen
farming and had no way of knowing what it would be like. Instead, as we