2 2 • PROLOGUE
The same two genetic and childhood developmental factors are likely to
distinguish not only New Guineans from Westerners, but also hunter-gath
erers and other members of technologically primitive societies from mem
bers of technologically advanced societies in general. Thus, the usual racist
assumption has to be turned on its head. Why is it that Europeans, despite
their likely genetic disadvantage and (in modern times) their undoubted
developmental disadvantage, ended up with much more of the cargo? Why
did New Guineans wind up technologically primitive, despite what I
believe to be their superior intelligence?
A GENETIC EXPLANATION isn't the only possible answer to Yali's ques
tion. Another one, popular with inhabitants of northern Europe, invokes
the supposed stimulatory effects of their homeland's cold climate and the
inhibitory effects of hot, humid, tropical climates on human creativity and
energy. Perhaps the seasonally variable climate at high latitudes poses
more diverse challenges than does a seasonally constant tropical climate.
Perhaps cold climates require one to be more technologically inventive to
survive, because one must build a warm home and make warm clothing,
whereas one can survive in the tropics with simpler housing and no cloth
ing. Or the argument can be reversed to reach the same conclusion: the
long winters at high latitudes leave people with much time in which to sit
indoors and invent.
Although formerly popular, this type of explanation, too, fails to sur
vive scrutiny. As we shall see, the peoples of northern Europe contributed
nothing of fundamental importance to Eurasian civilization until the last
thousand years; they simply had the good luck to live at a geographic
location where they were likely to receive advances (such as agriculture,
wheels, writing, and metallurgy) developed in warmer parts of Eurasia. In
the New World the cold regions at high latitude were even more of a
human backwater. The sole Native American societies to develop writing
arose in Mexico south of the Tropic of Cancer; the oldest New World
pottery comes from near the equator in tropical South America; and the
New World society generally considered the most advanced in art, astron
omy, and other respects was the Classic Maya society of the tropical Yuca
tan and Guatemala in the first millennium A.D.
Still a third type of answer to Yali invokes the supposed importance of
lowland river valleys in dry climates, where highly productive agriculture