NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 59
equally impressive compared with that of the Bronze Age, which in turn
dwarfed that of the Upper Paleolithic.
One reason why technology tends to catalyze itself is that advances
depend upon previous mastery of simpler problems. For example, Stone
Age farmers did not proceed directly to extracting and working iron,
which requires high-temperature furnaces. Instead, iron ore metallurgy
grew out of thousands of years of human experience with natural outcrops
of pure metals soft enough to be hammered into shape without heat (cop
per and gold). It also grew out of thousands of years of development of
simple furnaces to make pottery, and then to extract copper ores and work
copper alloys (bronzes) that do not require as high temperatures as does
iron. In both the Fertile Crescent and China, iron objects became common
only after about 2,000 years of experience of bronze metallurgy. New
World societies had just begun making bronze artifacts and had not yet
started making iron ones at the time when the arrival of Europeans trun
cated the New World's independent trajectory.
The other main reason for autocatalysis is that new technologies and
materials make it possible to generate still other new technologies by
recombination. For instance, why did printing spread explosively in medi
eval Europe after Gutenberg printed his Bible in A.D. 1455, but not after
that unknown printer printed the Phaistos disk in 1700 B.C.? The explana
tion is partly that medieval European printers were able to combine six
technological advances, most of which were unavailable to the maker of
the Phaistos disk. Of those advances—in paper, movable type, metallurgy,
presses, inks, and scripts—paper and the idea of movable type reached
Europe from China. Gutenberg's development of typecasting from metal
dies, to overcome the potentially fatal problem of nonuniform type size,
depended on many metallurgical developments: steel for letter punches,
brass or bronze alloys (later replaced by steel) for dies, lead for molds, and
a tin-zinc-lead alloy for type. Gutenberg's press was derived from screw
presses in use for making wine and olive oil, while his ink was an oil-based
improvement on existing inks. The alphabetic scripts that medieval Europe
inherited from three millennia of alphabet development lent themselves to
printing with movable type, because only a few dozen letter forms had to
be cast, as opposed to the thousands of signs required for Chinese writing.
In all six respects, the maker of the Phaistos disk had access to much
less powerful technologies to combine into a printing system than did
Gutenberg. The disk's writing medium was clay, which is much bulkier