ZEBRAS AND UNHAPPY MARRIAGES • 163
except the red kangaroo became extinct around the time of the continent's
first colonization by humans.
Thus, part of the explanation for Eurasia's having been the main site of
big mammal domestication is that it was the continent with the most can
didate species of wild mammals to start out with, and lost the fewest can
didates to extinction in the last 40,000 years. But the numbers in Table 9.2
warn us that that's not the whole explanation. It's also true that the per
centage of candidates actually domesticated is highest in Eurasia (18 per
cent), and is especially low in sub-Saharan Africa (no species domesticated
out of 51 candidates!). Particularly surprising is the large number of spe
cies of African and American mammals that were never domesticated,
despite their having Eurasian close relatives or counterparts that were
domesticated. Why were Eurasia's horses domesticated, but not Africa's
zebras? Why Eurasia's pigs, but not American peccaries or Africa's three
species of true wild pigs? Why Eurasia's five species of wild cattle (aurochs,
water buffalo, yak, gaur, banteng), but not the African buffalo or Ameri
can bison? Why the Asian mouflon sheep (ancestor of our domestic sheep),
but not North American bighorn sheep?
DID ALL THOSE peoples of Africa, the Americas, and Australia, despite
their enormous diversity, nonetheless share some cultural obstacles to
domestication not shared with Eurasian peoples? For example, did Africa's
abundance of big wild mammals, available to kill by hunting, make it
superfluous for Africans to go to the trouble of tending domestic stock?
The answer to that question is unequivocal: No! The interpretation is
refuted by five types of evidence: rapid acceptance of Eurasian domesti
cates by non-Eurasian peoples, the universal human penchant for keeping
pets, the rapid domestication of the Ancient Fourteen, the repeated inde
pendent domestications of some of them, and the limited successes of mod
ern efforts at further domestications.
First, when Eurasia's Major Five domestic mammals reached sub-
Saharan Africa, they were adopted by the most diverse African peoples
wherever conditions permitted. Those African herders thereby achieved a
huge advantage over African hunter-gatherers and quickly displaced them.
In particular, Bantu farmers who acquired cows and sheep spread out of
their homeland in West Africa and within a short time overran the former
hunter-gatherers in most of the rest of sub-Saharan Africa. Even without