LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK • 2 13
of Eurasian herd animals that became domesticated. Whereas many such
animals existed in Eurasia, only five animals of any sort became domesti
cated in the Americas: the turkey in Mexico and the U.S. Southwest, the
llama / alpaca and the guinea pig in the Andes, the Muscovy duck in tropi
cal South America, and the dog throughout the Americas.
In turn, we also saw that this extreme paucity of domestic animals in
the New World reflects the paucity of wild starting material. About 80
percent of the big wild mammals of the Americas became extinct at the
end of the last Ice Age, around 13,000 years ago. The few domesticates
that remained to Native Americans were not likely sources of crowd dis
eases, compared with cows and pigs. Muscovy ducks and turkeys don't
live in enormous flocks, and they're not cuddly species (like young lambs)
with which we have much physical contact. Guinea pigs may have contrib
uted a trypanosome infection like Chagas' disease or leishmaniasis to our
catalog of woes, but that's uncertain. Initially, most surprising is the
absence of any human disease derived from llamas (or alpacas), which it's
tempting to consider the Andean equivalent of Eurasian livestock. How
ever, llamas had four strikes against them as a source of human pathogens:
they were kept in smaller herds than were sheep and goats and pigs; their
total numbers were never remotely as large as those of the Eurasian popu
lations of domestic livestock, since llamas never spread beyond the Andes;
people don't drink (and get infected by) llama milk; and llamas aren't kept
indoors, in close association with people. In contrast, human mothers in
the New Guinea highlands often nurse piglets, and pigs as well as cows
are frequently kept inside the huts of peasant farmers.
THE HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE of animal-derived diseases extends far
beyond the collision of the Old and the New Worlds. Eurasian germs
played a key role in decimating native peoples in many other parts of the
world, including Pacific islanders, Aboriginal Australians, and the Khoisan
peoples (Hottentots and Bushmen) of southern Africa. Cumulative mortal
ities of these previously unexposed peoples from Eurasian germs ranged
from 50 percent to 100 percent. For instance, the Indian population of
Hispaniola declined from around 8 million, when Columbus arrived in
A.D. 1492, to zero by 1535. Measles reached Fiji with a Fijian chief
returning from a visit to Australia in 1875, and proceeded to kill about
one-quarter of all Fijians then alive (after most Fijians had already been