LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK • 203
of as the familiar acute epidemic diseases of childhood, including measles,
rubella, mumps, pertussis, and smallpox.
The reason why the combination of those four traits tends to make a
disease run in epidemics is easy to understand. In simplified form, here's
what happens. The rapid spread of microbes, and the rapid course of
symptoms, mean that everybody in a local human population is quickly
infected and soon thereafter is either dead or else recovered and immune.
No one is left alive who could still be infected. But since the microbe can't
survive except in the bodies of living people, the disease dies out, until a
new crop of babies reaches the susceptible age—and until an infectious
person arrives from the outside to start a new epidemic.
A classic illustration of how such diseases occur as epidemics is the
history of measles on the isolated Atlantic islands called the Faeroes. A
severe epidemic of measles reached the Faeroes in 1781 and then died out,
leaving the islands measles free until an infected carpenter arrived on a
ship from Denmark in 1846. Within three months, almost the whole
Faeroes population (7,782 people) had gotten measles and then either died
or recovered, leaving the measles virus to disappear once again until the
next epidemic. Studies show that measles is likely to die out in any human
population numbering fewer than half a million people. Only in larger
populations can the disease shift from one local area to another, thereby
persisting until enough babies have been born in the originally infected
area that measles can return there.
What's true for measles in the Faeroes is true of our other familiar acute
infectious diseases throughout the world. To sustain themselves, they need
a human population that is sufficiently numerous, and sufficiently densely
packed, that a numerous new crop of susceptible children is available for
infection by the time the disease would otherwise be waning. Hence mea
sles and similar diseases are also known as crowd diseases.
OBVIOUSLY, CROWD DISEASES could not sustain themselves in small
bands of hunter-gatherers and slash-and-burn farmers. As tragic modern
experience with Amazonian Indians and Pacific Islanders confirms, almost
an entire tribelet may be wiped out by an epidemic brought by an outside
visitor—because no one in the tribelet had any antibodies against the
microbe. For example, in the winter of 1902 a dysentery epidemic brought