UP TO THE STARTING LINE " 47
mammals whose bones are available in greatest abundance and have been
dated especially accurately, one can pinpoint the extinctions as having
occurred around 11,000 B.C. Perhaps the two most accurately dated
extinctions are those of the Shasta ground sloth and Harrington's moun
tain goat in the Grand Canyon area; both of those populations disap
peared within a century or two of 11,100 B.C. Whether coincidentally or
not, that date is identical, within experimental error, to the date of Clovis
hunters' arrival in the Grand Canyon area.
The discovery of numerous skeletons of mammoths with Clovis spear-
points between their ribs suggests that this agreement of dates is not a
coincidence. Hunters expanding southward through the Americas,
encountering big animals that had never seen humans before, may have
found those American animals easy to kill and may have exterminated
them. A countertheory is that America's big mammals instead became
extinct because of climate changes at the end of the last Ice Age, which
(to confuse the interpretation for modern paleontologists) also happened
around 11,000 B.C.
Personally, I have the same problem with a climatic theory of megafau¬
nal extinction in the Americas as with such a theory in Australia / New
Guinea. The Americas' big animals had already survived the ends of 22
previous Ice Ages. Why did most of them pick the 23rd to expire in con
cert, in the presence of all those supposedly harmless humans? Why did
they disappear in all habitats, not only in habitats that contracted but also
in ones that greatly expanded at the end of the last Ice Age? Hence I sus
pect that Clovis hunters did it, but the debate remains unresolved. Which
ever theory proves correct, most large wild mammal species that might
otherwise have later been domesticated by Native Americans were thereby
removed.
Also unresolved is the question whether Clovis hunters really were the
first Americans. As always happens whenever anyone claims the first any
thing, claims of discoveries of pre-Clovis human sites in the Americas are
constantly being advanced. Every year, a few of those new claims really
do appear convincing and exciting when initially announced. Then the
inevitable problems of interpretation arise. Were the reported tools at the
site really tools made by humans, or just natural rock shapes? Are the
reported radiocarbon dates really correct, and not invalidated by any of
the numerous difficulties that can plague radiocarbon dating? If the dates
are correct, are they really associated with human products, rather than