3 78 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
THE FIVE MAJOR human groups to which Africa was already home by
A.D. 1000 are those loosely referred to by laypeople as blacks, whites,
African Pygmies, Khoisan, and Asians. Figure 19.1 depicts their distribu
tions, while the portraits following page 288 will remind you of their strik
ing differences in skin color, hair form and color, and facial features.
Blacks were formerly confined to Africa, Pygmies and Khoisan still live
only there, while many more whites and Asians live outside Africa than in
it. These five groups constitute or represent all the major divisions of
humanity except for Aboriginal Australians and their relatives.
Many readers may already be protesting: don't stereotype people by
classifying them into arbitrary "races"! Yes, I acknowledge that each of
these so-called major groups is very diverse. To lump people as different
as Zulus, Somalis, and Ibos under the single heading of "blacks" ignores
the differences between them. We ignore equally big differences when we
lump Africa's Egyptians and Berbers with each other and with Europe's
Swedes under the single heading of "whites." In addition, the divisions
between blacks, whites, and the other major groups are arbitrary, because
each such group shades into others: all human groups on Earth have mated
with humans of every other group that they encountered. Nevertheless, as
we'll see, recognizing these major groups is still so useful for understand
ing history that I'll use the group names as shorthand, without repeating
the above caveats in every sentence.
Of the five African groups, representatives of many populations of
blacks and whites are familiar to Americans and Europeans and need no
physical description. Blacks occupied the largest area of Africa even as of
A.D. 1400: the southern Sahara and most of sub-Saharan Africa (see Figure
19.1). While American blacks of African descent originated mainly from
Africa's west coastal zone, similar peoples traditionally occupied East
Africa as well, north to the Sudan and south to the southeast coast of
South Africa itself. Whites, ranging from Egyptians and Libyans to Moroc
cans, occupied Africa's north coastal zone and the northern Sahara. Those
North Africans would hardly be confused with blue-eyed blond-haired
Swedes, but most laypeople would still call them "whites" because they
have lighter skin and straighter hair than peoples to the south termed
"blacks." Most of Africa's blacks and whites depended on farming or
herding, or both, for their living.
In contrast, the next two groups, the Pygmies and Khoisan, include