206 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Similarly, bubonic plague first appeared in Europe as the Plague of Jus
tinian (A.D. 542-43). But plague didn't begin to hit Europe with full force
as the Black Death epidemics until A.D. 1346, when a new route for over
land trade with China provided rapid transit, along Eurasia's east-west
axis, for flea-infested furs from plague-ridden areas of Central Asia to
Europe. Today, our jet planes have made even the longest intercontinental
flights briefer than the duration of any human infectious disease. That's
how an Aerolineas Argentinas airplane, stopping in Lima (Peru) in 1991,
managed to deliver dozens of cholera-infected people that same day to my
city of Los Angeles, over 3,000 miles from Lima. The explosive increase
in world travel by Americans, and in immigration to the United States, is
turning us into another melting pot—this time, of microbes that we pre
viously dismissed as just causing exotic diseases in far-off countries.
THUS, WHEN THE human population became sufficiently large and con
centrated, we reached the stage in our history at which we could at last
evolve and sustain crowd diseases confined to our own species. But that
conclusion presents a paradox: such diseases could never have existed
before then! Instead, they had to evolve as new diseases. Where did those
new diseases come from?
Evidence has recently been emerging from molecular studies of the dis
ease-causing microbes themselves. For many of the microbes responsible
for our unique diseases, molecular biologists can now identify the
microbe's closest relatives. These also prove to be agents of crowd infec
tious diseases—but ones confined to various species of our domestic ani
mals and pets! Among animals, too, epidemic diseases require large, dense
populations and don't afflict just any animal: they're confined mainly to
social animals providing the necessary large populations. Hence when we
domesticated social animals, such as cows and pigs, they were already
afflicted by epidemic diseases just waiting to be transferred to us.
For example, measles virus is most closely related to the virus causing
rinderpest. That nasty epidemic disease affects cattle and many wild cud-
chewing mammals, but not humans. Measles in turn doesn't afflict cattle.
The close similarity of the measles virus to the rinderpest virus suggests
that the latter transferred from cattle to humans and then evolved into the
measles virus by changing its properties to adapt to us. That transfer is not
at all surprising, considering that many peasant farmers live and sleep