SPACIOUS SKIES AND TILTED AXES • 183
domesticated again elsewhere after their initial domestication in the Fertile
Crescent. Had they been repeatedly domesticated independently, they
would exhibit legacies of those multiple origins in the form of varied chro
mosomal arrangements or varied mutations. Hence these are typical exam
ples of the phenomenon of preemptive domestication that we discussed
above. The quick spread of the Fertile Crescent package preempted any
possible other attempts, within the Fertile Crescent or elsewhere, to
domesticate the same wild ancestors. Once the crop had become available,
there was no further need to gather it from the wild and thereby set it on
the path to domestication again.
The ancestors of most of the founder crops have wild relatives, in the
Fertile Crescent and elsewhere, that would also have been suitable for
domestication. For example, peas belong to the genus Pisum, which con
sists of two wild species: Pisum sativum, the one that became domesticated
to yield our garden peas, and Pisum fulvum, which was never domesti
cated. Yet wild peas of Pisum fulvum taste good, either fresh or dried, and
are common in the wild. Similarly, wheats, barley, lentil, chickpea, beans,
and flax all have numerous wild relatives besides the ones that became
domesticated. Some of those related beans and barleys were indeed domes
ticated independently in the Americas or China, far from the early site of
domestication in the Fertile Crescent. But in western Eurasia only one of
several potentially useful wild species was domesticated—probably
because that one spread so quickly that people soon stopped gathering the
other wild relatives and ate only the crop. Again as we discussed above,
the crop's rapid spread preempted any possible further attempts to domes
ticate its relatives, as well as to redomesticate its ancestor.
WHY WAS THE spread of crops from the Fertile Crescent so rapid? The
answer depends partly on that east-west axis of Eurasia with which I
opened this chapter. Localities distributed east and west of each other at
the same latitude share exactly the same day length and its seasonal varia
tions. To a lesser degree, they also tend to share similar diseases, regimes
of temperature and rainfall, and habitats or biomes (types of vegetation).
For example, Portugal, northern Iran, and Japan, all located at about the
same latitude but lying successively 4,000 miles east or west of each other,
are more similar to each other in climate than each is to a location lying
even a mere 1,000 miles due south. On all the continents the habitat type