3 68 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
families, each consisting of up to several hundred related languages. For
example, the Indo-European language family, which includes English as
well as French, Russian, Greek, and Hindi, comprises about 144 lan
guages. Quite a few of those families occupy large contiguous areas—in
the case of Indo-European, the area encompassing most of Europe east
through much of western Asia to India. Linguistic, historical, and archaeo
logical evidence combines to make clear that each of these large, contigu
ous distributions stems from a historical expansion of an ancestral
language, followed by subsequent local linguistic differentiation to form a
family of related languages (Table 18.2). Most such expansions appear to
be attributable to the advantages that speakers of the ancestral language,
belonging to food-producing societies, held over hunter-gatherers. We
already discussed such historical expansions in Chapters 16 and 17 for
the Sino-Tibetan, Austronesian, and other East Asian language families.
Among major expansions of the last millennium are those that carried
Indo-European languages from Europe to the Americas and Australia, the
Russian language from eastern Europe across Siberia, and Turkish (a lan
guage of the Altaic family) from Central Asia westward to Turkey.
With the exception of the Eskimo-Aleut language family of the Ameri
can Arctic and the Na-Dene language family of Alaska, northwestern Can
ada, and the U.S. Southwest, the Americas lack examples of large-scale
language expansions widely accepted by linguists. Most linguists specializ
ing in Native American languages do not discern large, clear-cut groupings
other than Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene. At most, they consider the evi
dence sufficient only to group other Native American languages (variously
estimated to number from 600 to 2,000) into a hundred or more language
groups or isolated languages. A controversial minority view is that of the
linguist Joseph Greenberg, who groups all Native American languages
other than Eskimo-Aleut and Na-Dene languages into a single large family,
termed Amerind, with about a dozen subfamilies.
Some of Greenberg's subfamilies, and some groupings recognized by
more-traditional linguists, may turn out to be legacies of New World pop
ulation expansions driven in part by food production. These legacies may
include the Uto-Aztecan languages of Mesoamerica and the western
United States, the Oto-Manguean languages of Mesoamerica, the
Natchez-Muskogean languages of the U.S. Southeast, and the Arawak lan
guages of the West Indies. But the difficulties that linguists have in agreeing