90 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
erer societies tend to be relatively egalitarian, to lack full-time bureaucrats
and hereditary chiefs, and to have small-scale political organization at the
level of the band or tribe. That's because all able-bodied hunter-gatherers
are obliged to devote much of their time to acquiring food. In contrast,
once food can be stockpiled, a political elite can gain control of food pro
duced by others, assert the right of taxation, escape the need to feed itself,
and engage full-time in political activities. Hence moderate-sized agricul
tural societies are often organized in chiefdoms, and kingdoms are con
fined to large agricultural societies. Those complex political units are much
better able to mount a sustained war of conquest than is an egalitarian
band of hunters. Some hunter-gatherers in especially rich environments,
such as the Pacific Northwest coast of North America and the coast of
Ecuador, also developed sedentary societies, food storage, and nascent
chiefdoms, but they did not go farther on the road to kingdoms.
A stored food surplus built up by taxation can support other full-time
specialists besides kings and bureaucrats. Of most direct relevance to wars
of conquest, it can be used to feed professional soldiers. That was the
decisive factor in the British Empire's eventual defeat of New Zealand's
well-armed indigenous Maori population. While the Maori achieved some
stunning temporary victories, they could not maintain an army constantly
in the field and were in the end worn down by 18,000 full-time British
troops. Stored food can also feed priests, who provide religious justifica
tion for wars of conquest; artisans such as metalworkers, who develop
swords, guns, and other technologies; and scribes, who preserve far more
information than can be remembered accurately.
So far, I've emphasized direct and indirect values of crops and livestock
as food. However, they have other uses, such as keeping us warm and
providing us with valuable materials. Crops and livestock yield natural
fibers for making clothing, blankets, nets, and rope. Most of the major
centers of plant domestication evolved not only food crops but also fiber
crops—notably cotton, flax (the source of linen), and hemp. Several
domestic animals yielded animal fibers—especially wool from sheep,
goats, llamas, and alpacas, and silk from silkworms. Bones of domestic
animals were important raw materials for artifacts of Neolithic peoples
before the development of metallurgy. Cow hides were used to make
leather. One of the earliest cultivated plants in many parts of the Americas
was grown for nonfood purposes: the bottle gourd, used as a container.
Big domestic mammals further revolutionized human society by becom-