270 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
continue to live as nomadic bands, when most other New Guinea peoples,
and almost all other peoples elsewhere in the world, now live in settled
larger groups? The explanation is that the region lacks dense local concen
trations of resources that would permit many people to live together, and
that (until the arrival of missionaries bringing crop plants) it also lacked
native plants that could have permitted productive farming. The bands'
food staple is the sago palm tree, whose core yields a starchy pith when
the palm reaches maturity. The bands are nomadic, because they must
move when they have cut the mature sago trees in an area. Band numbers
are kept low by diseases (especially malaria), by the lack of raw materials
in the swamp (even stone for tools must be obtained by trade), and by the
limited amount of food that the swamp yields for humans. Similar limita
tions on the resources accessible to existing human technology prevail in
the regions of the world recently occupied by other bands.
Our closest animal relatives, the gorillas and chimpanzees and bonobos
of Africa, also live in bands. All humans presumably did so too, until
improved technology for extracting food allowed some hunter-gatherers
to settle in permanent dwellings in some resource-rich areas. The band is
the political, economic, and social organization that we inherited from our
millions of years of evolutionary history. Our developments beyond it all
took place within the last few tens of thousands of years.
THE FIRST OF those stages beyond the band is termed the tribe, which
differs in being larger (typically comprising hundreds rather than dozens
of people) and usually having fixed settlements. However, some tribes and
even chiefdoms consist of herders who move seasonally.
Tribal organization is exemplified by New Guinea highlanders, whose
political unit before the arrival of colonial government was a village or
else a close-knit cluster of villages. This political definition of "tribe" is
thus often much smaller than what linguists and cultural anthropologists
would define as a tribe—namely, a group that shares language and culture.
For example, in 1964 I began to work among a group of highlanders
known as the Fore. By linguistic and cultural standards, there were then
12,000 Fore, speaking two mutually intelligible dialects and living in 65
villages of several hundred people each. But there was no political unity
whatsoever among villages of the Fore language group. Each hamlet was
involved in a kaleidoscopically changing pattern of war and shifting alli-