2 I 6 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
political organization as a modern agent of conquest. The commands of
the monarchs and merchants who organized colonizing fleets were con
veyed in writing. The fleets set their courses by maps and written sailing
directions prepared by previous expeditions. Written accounts of earlier
expeditions motivated later ones, by describing the wealth and fertile lands
awaiting the conquerors. The accounts taught subsequent explorers what
conditions to expect, and helped them prepare themselves. The resulting
empires were administered with the aid of writing. While all those types of
information were also transmitted by other means in preliterate societies,
writing made the transmission easier, more detailed, more accurate, and
more persuasive.
Why, then, did only some peoples and not others develop writing, given
its overwhelming value? For example, why did no traditional hunters-
gatherers evolve or adopt writing? Among island empires, why did writing
arise in Minoan Crete but not in Polynesian Tonga? How many separate
times did writing evolve in human history, under what circumstances, and
for what uses? Of those peoples who did develop it, why did some do
so much earlier than others? For instance, today almost all Japanese and
Scandinavians are literate but most Iraqis are not: why did writing never
theless arise nearly four thousand years earlier in Iraq?
The diffusion of writing from its sites of origin also raises important
questions. Why, for instance, did it spread to Ethiopia and Arabia from
the Fertile Crescent, but not to the Andes from Mexico? Did writing sys
tems spread by being copied, or did existing systems merely inspire neigh
boring peoples to invent their own systems? Given a writing system that
works well for one language, how do you devise a system for a different
language? Similar questions arise whenever one tries to understand the
origins and spread of many other aspects of human culture—such as tech
nology, religion, and food production. The historian interested in such
questions about writing has the advantage that they can often be answered
in unique detail by means of the written record itself. We shall therefore
trace writing's development not only because of its inherent importance,
but also for the general insights into cultural history that it provides.
THE THREE BASIC strategies underlying writing systems differ in the
size of the speech unit denoted by one written sign: either a single basic
sound, a whole syllable, or a whole word. Of these, the one employed