4 6 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
tralia / New Guinea. That is, everything about the Clovis phenomenon and
its spread through the Americas corresponds to findings for other, unques
tioned virgin-land colonizations in history.
What might be the significance of Clovis sites' bursting forth in the
centuries just before 11,000 B.C., rather than in those before 16,000 or
21,000 B.C.? Recall that Siberia has always been cold, and that a continu
ous ice sheet stretched as an impassable barrier across the whole width of
Canada during much of the Pleistocene Ice Ages. We have already seen
that the technology required for coping with extreme cold did not emerge
until after anatomically modern humans invaded Europe around 40,000
years ago, and that people did not colonize Siberia until 20,000 years later.
Eventually, those early Siberians crossed to Alaska, either by sea across the
Bering Strait (only 50 miles wide even today) or else on foot at glacial
times when Bering Strait was dry land. The Bering land bridge, during its
millennia of intermittent existence, would have been up to a thousand
miles wide, covered by open tundra, and easily traversable by people
adapted to cold conditions. The land bridge was flooded and became a
strait again most recently when sea level rose after around 14,000 B.C.
Whether those early Siberians walked or paddled to Alaska, the earliest
secure evidence of human presence in Alaska dates from around 12,000
B.C.
Soon thereafter, a north-south ice-free corridor opened in the Canadian
ice sheet, permitting the first Alaskans to pass through and come out into
the Great Plains around the site of the modern Canadian city of Edmon
ton. That removed the last serious barrier between Alaska and Patagonia
for modern humans. The Edmonton pioneers would have found the Great
Plains teeming with game. They would have thrived, increased in numbers,
and gradually spread south to occupy the whole hemisphere.
One other feature of the Clovis phenomenon fits our expectations for
the first human presence south of the Canadian ice sheet. Like Australia /
New Guinea, the Americas had originally been full of big mammals. About
15,000 years ago, the American West looked much as Africa's Serengeti
Plains do today, with herds of elephants and horses pursued by lions and
cheetahs, and joined by members of such exotic species as camels and giant
ground sloths. Just as in Australia / New Guinea, in the Americas most of
those large mammals became extinct. Whereas the extinctions took place
probably before 30,000 years ago in Australia, they occurred around
17,000 to 12,000 years ago in the Americas. For those extinct American