HISTORY'S HAVES AND HAVE-NOTS • 101
In three or four such areas, the arriving founder package came from
Southwest Asia. One of them is western and central Europe, where food
production arose with the arrival of Southwest Asian crops and animals
between 6000 and 3500 B.C., but at least one plant (the poppy, and proba
bly oats and some others) was then domesticated locally. Wild poppies are
confined to coastal areas of the western Mediterranean. Poppy seeds are
absent from excavated sites of the earliest farming communities in eastern
Europe and Southwest Asia; they first appear in early farming sites in west
ern Europe. In contrast, the wild ancestors of most Southwest Asian crops
and animals were absent from western Europe. Thus, it seems clear that
food production did not evolve independently in western Europe. Instead,
it was triggered there by the arrival of Southwest Asian domesticates. The
resulting western European farming societies domesticated the poppy,
which subsequently spread eastward as a crop.
Another area where local domestication appears to have followed the
arrival of Southwest Asian founder crops is the Indus Valley region of the
Indian subcontinent. The earliest farming communities there in the seventh
millennium B.C. utilized wheat, barley, and other crops that had been pre
viously domesticated in the Fertile Crescent and that evidently spread to
the Indus Valley through Iran. Only later did domesticates derived from
indigenous species of the Indian subcontinent, such as humped cattle and
sesame, appear in Indus Valley farming communities. In Egypt as well,
food production began in the sixth millennium B.C. with the arrival of
Southwest Asian crops. Egyptians then domesticated the sycamore fig and
a local vegetable called chufa.
The same pattern perhaps applies to Ethiopia, where wheat, barley, and
other Southwest Asian crops have been cultivated for a long time. Ethiopi
ans also domesticated many locally available wild species to obtain crops
most of which are still confined to Ethiopia, but one of them (the coffee
bean) has now spread around the world. However, it is not yet known
whether Ethiopians were cultivating these local plants before or only after
the arrival of the Southwest Asian package.
In these and other areas where food production depended on the arrival
of founder crops from elsewhere, did local hunter-gatherers themselves
adopt those founder crops from neighboring farming peoples and thereby
become farmers themselves? Or was the founder package instead brought
by invading farmers, who were thereby enabled to outbreed the local hunt
ers and to kill, displace, or outnumber them?