HISTORY'S HAVES AND HAVE-NOTS 95
animal remains at archaeological sites. Most domesticated plant and ani
mal species differ morphologically from their wild ancestors: for example,
in the smaller size of domestic cattle and sheep, the larger size of domestic
chickens and apples, the thinner and smoother seed coats of domestic peas,
and the corkscrew-twisted rather than scimitar-shaped horns of domestic
goats. Hence remains of domesticated plants and animals at a dated
archaeological site can be recognized and provide strong evidence of food
production at that place and time, whereas finding the remains only of
wild species at a site fails to provide evidence of food production and is
compatible with hunting-gathering. Naturally, food producers, especially
early ones, continued to gather some wild plants and hunt wild animals,
so the food remains at their sites often include wild species as well as
domesticated ones.
Archaeologists date food production by radiocarbon dating of carbon-
containing materials at the site. This method is based on the slow decay of
radioactive carbon 14, a very minor component of carbon, the ubiquitous
building block of life, into the nonradioactive isotope nitrogen 14. Carbon
14 is continually being generated in the atmosphere by cosmic rays. Plants
take up atmospheric carbon, which has a known and approximately con
stant ratio of carbon 14 to the prevalent isotope carbon 12 (a ratio of
about one to a million). That plant carbon goes on to form the body of
the herbivorous animals that eat the plants, and of the carnivorous animals
that eat those herbivorous animals. Once the plant or animal dies, though,
half of its carbon 14 content decays into carbon 12 every 5,700 years, until
after about 40,000 years the carbon 14 content is very low and difficult to
measure or to distinguish from contamination with small amounts of mod
ern materials containing carbon 14. Hence the age of material from an
archaeological site can be calculated from the material's carbon 14/car
bon 12 ratio.
Radiocarbon is plagued by numerous technical problems, of which two
deserve mention here. One is that radiocarbon dating until the 1980s
required relatively large amounts of carbon (a few grams), much more
than the amount in small seeds or bones. Hence scientists instead often
had to resort to dating material recovered nearby at the same site and
believed to be "associated with" the food remains—that is, to have been
deposited simultaneously by the people who left the food. A typical choice
of "associated" material is charcoal from fires.
But archaeological sites are not always neatly sealed time capsules of