UP TO THE STARTING LINE 45
ago, the Americas were first colonized. The oldest unquestioned human
remains in the Americas are at sites in Alaska dated around 12,000 B.C.,
followed by a profusion of sites in the United States south of the Canadian
border and in Mexico in the centuries just before 11,000 B.C. The latter
sites are called Clovis sites, named after the type site near the town of
Clovis, New Mexico, where their characteristic large stone spearpoints
were first recognized. Hundreds of Clovis sites are now known, blanketing
all 48 of the lower U.S. states south into Mexico. Unquestioned evidence
of human presence appears soon thereafter in Amazonia and in Patagonia.
These facts suggest the interpretation that Clovis sites document the Amer
icas' first colonization by people, who quickly multiplied, expanded, and
filled the two continents.
One might at first be surprised that Clovis descendants could reach
Patagonia, lying 8,000 miles south of the U.S.-Canada border, in less than
a thousand years. However, that translates into an average expansion of
only 8 miles per year, a trivial feat for a hunter-gatherer likely to cover
that distance even within a single day's normal foraging.
One might also at first be surprised that the Americas evidently filled
up with humans so quickly that people were motivated to keep spreading
south toward Patagonia. That population growth also proves unsurprising
when one stops to consider the actual numbers. If the Americas eventually
came to hold hunter-gatherers at an average population density of some
what under one person per square mile (a high value for modern hunter-
gatherers), then the whole area of the Americas would eventually have
held about 10 million hunter-gatherers. But even if the initial colonists had
consisted of only 100 people and their numbers had increased at a rate of
only 1.1 percent per year, the colonists' descendants would have reached
that population ceiling of 10 million people within a thousand years. A
population growth rate of 1.1 percent per year is again trivial: rates as
high as 3.4 percent per year have been observed in modern times when
people colonized virgin lands, such as when the HMS Bounty mutineers
and their Tahitian wives colonized Pitcairn Island.
The profusion of Clovis hunters' sites within the first few centuries after
their arrival resembles the site profusion documented archaeologically for
the more recent discovery of New Zealand by ancestral Maori. A profu
sion of early sites is also documented for the much older colonization of
Europe by anatomically modern humans, and for the occupation of Aus-