HOW CHINA BECAME CHINESE • 3 33
Chinese and the modern tropical Southeast Asians who are their offshoots.
Those relict Negritos of Southeast Asia may be the last survivors of the
source population from which New Guinea was colonized. The Semang
Negritos persisted as hunter-gatherers trading with neighboring farmers
but adopted an Austroasiatic language from those farmers—much as, we
shall see, Philippine Negrito and African Pygmy hunter-gatherers adopted
languages from their farmer trading partners. Only on the remote Anda
man Islands do languages unrelated to the South Chinese language families
persist—the last linguistic survivors of what must have been hundreds of
now extinct aboriginal Southeast Asian languages.
Even Korea and Japan were heavily influenced by China, although their
geographic isolation from it ensured that they did not lose their languages
or physical and genetic distinctness, as did tropical Southeast Asia. Korea
and Japan adopted rice from China in the second millennium B.c., bronze
metallurgy by the first millennium B.c., and writing in the first millennium
A.D. China also transmitted West Asian wheat and barley to Korea and
Japan.
In thus describing China's seminal role in East Asian civilization, we
should not exaggerate. It is not the case that all cultural advances in East
Asia stemmed from China and that Koreans, Japanese, and tropical South
east Asians were noninventive barbarians who contributed nothing. The
ancient Japanese developed some of the oldest pottery in the world and
settled as hunter-gatherers in villages subsisting on Japan's rich seafood
resources, long before the arrival of food production. Some crops were
probably domesticated first or independently in Japan, Korea, and tropical
Southeast Asia.
But China's role was nonetheless disproportionate. For example, the
prestige value of Chinese culture is still so great in Japan and Korea that
Japan has no thought of discarding its Chinese-derived writing system
despite its drawbacks for representing Japanese speech, while Korea is
only now replacing its clumsy Chinese-derived writing with its wonderful
indigenous han'gul alphabet. That persistence of Chinese writing in Japan
and Korea is a vivid 20th-century legacy of plant and animal domestica
tion in China nearly 10,000 years ago. Thanks to the achievements of East
Asia's first farmers, China became Chinese, and peoples from Thailand to
(as we shall see in the next chapter) Easter Island became their cousins.