APPLES OR INDIANS • 151
crops. All of them were high in protein—17-32 percent, compared with
8-14 percent for wheat, 9 percent for corn, and even lower for barley and
white rice. Two of them, sunflower and sumpweed, were also high in oil
(45-47 percent). Sumpweed, in particular, would have been a nutritionist's
ultimate dream, being 32 percent protein and 45 percent oil. Why aren't
we still eating those dream foods today?
Alas, despite their nutritional advantage, most of these eastern U.S.
crops suffered from serious disadvantages in other respects. Goosefoot,
knotweed, little barley, and maygrass had tiny seeds, with volumes only
one-tenth that of wheat and barley seeds. Worse yet, sumpweed is a wind-
pollinated relative of ragweed, the notorious hayfever-causing plant. Like
ragweed's, sumpweed's pollen can cause hayfever where the plant occurs
in abundant stands. If that doesn't kill your enthusiasm for becoming a
sumpweed farmer, be aware that it has a strong odor objectionable to
some people and that handling it can cause skin irritation.
Mexican crops finally began to reach the eastern United States by trade
routes after A.D. 1. Corn arrived around A.D. 200, but its role remained
very minor for many centuries. Finally, around A.D. 900 a new variety of
corn adapted to North America's short summers appeared, and the arrival
of beans around A.D. 1100 completed Mexico's crop trinity of corn, beans,
and squash. Eastern U.S. farming became greatly intensified, and densely
populated chiefdoms developed along the Mississippi River and its tribu
taries. In some areas the original local domesticates were retained along
side the far more productive Mexican trinity, but in other areas the trinity
replaced them completely. No European ever saw sumpweed growing in
Indian gardens, because it had disappeared as a crop by the time that Euro
pean colonization of the Americas began, in A.D. 1492. Among all those
ancient eastern U.S. crop specialties, only two (sunflower and eastern
squash) have been able to compete with crops domesticated elsewhere and
are still grown today. Our modern acorn squashes and summer squashes
are derived from those American squashes domesticated thousands of
years ago.
Thus, like the case of New Guinea, that of the eastern United States is
instructive. A priori, the region might have seemed a likely one to support
productive indigenous agriculture. It has rich soils, reliable moderate rain
fall, and a suitable climate that sustains bountiful agriculture today. The
flora is a species-rich one that includes productive wild nut trees (oak and