YALI'S PEOPLE • 303
the highlands, and mountain streams carrying huge quantities of silt to
the lowlands. In contrast, Australia has by far the oldest, most infertile,
most nutrient-leached soils of any continent, because of Australia's little
volcanic activity and its lack of high mountains and glaciers. Despite hav
ing only one-tenth of Australia's area, New Guinea is home to approxi
mately as many mammal and bird species as is Australia—a result of New
Guinea's equatorial location, much higher rainfall, much greater range of
elevations, and greater fertility. All of those environmental differences
influenced the two hemi-continents' very disparate cultural histories,
which we shall now consider.
THE EARLIEST AND most intensive food production, and the densest
populations, of Greater Australia arose in the highland valleys of New
Guinea at altitudes between 4,000 and 9,000 feet above sea level. Archae
ological excavations uncovered complex systems of drainage ditches dat
ing back to 9,000 years ago and becoming extensive by 6,000 years ago,
as well as terraces serving to retain soil moisture in drier areas. The ditch
systems were similar to those still used today in the highlands to drain
swampy areas for use as gardens. By around 5,000 years ago, pollen analy
ses testify to widespread deforestation of highland valleys, suggesting for
est clearance for agriculture.
Today, the staple crops of highland agriculture are the recently intro
duced sweet potato, along with taro, bananas, yams, sugarcane, edible
grass stems, and several leafy vegetables. Because taro, bananas, and yams
are native to Southeast Asia, an undoubted site of plant domestication, it
used to be assumed that New Guinea highland crops other than sweet
potatoes arrived from Asia. However, it was eventually realized that the
wild ancestors of sugarcane, the leafy vegetables, and the edible grass
stems are New Guinea species, that the particular types of bananas grown
in New Guinea have New Guinea rather than Asian wild ancestors, and
that taro and some yams are native to New Guinea as well as to Asia. If
New Guinea agriculture had really had Asian origins, one might have
expected to find highland crops derived unequivocally from Asia, but there
are none. For those reasons it is now generally acknowledged that agricul
ture arose indigenously in the New Guinea highlands by domestication of
New Guinea wild plant species.
New Guinea thus joins the Fertile Crescent, China, and a few other