410 • EPILOGUE
Europe from the Islamic societies stretching from India to North Africa,
rather than vice versa. During those same centuries China led the world in
technology, having launched itself on food production nearly as early as
the Fertile Crescent did.
Why, then, did the Fertile Crescent and China eventually lose their enor
mous leads of thousands of years to late-starting Europe? One can, of
course, point to proximate factors behind Europe's rise: its development
of a merchant class, capitalism, and patent protection for inventions, its
failure to develop absolute despots and crushing taxation, and its Greco-
Judeo-Christian tradition of critical empirical inquiry. Still, for all such
proximate causes one must raise the question of ultimate cause: why did
these proximate factors themselves arise in Europe, rather than in China
or the Fertile Crescent?
For the Fertile Crescent, the answer is clear. Once it had lost the head
start that it had enjoyed thanks to its locally available concentration of
domesticable wild plants and animals, the Fertile Crescent possessed no
further compelling geographic advantages. The disappearance of that head
start can be traced in detail, as the westward shift in powerful empires.
After the rise of Fertile Crescent states in the fourth millennium B.c., the
center of power initially remained in the Fertile Crescent, rotating between
empires such as those of Babylon, the Hittites, Assyria, and Persia. With
the Greek conquest of all advanced societies from Greece east to India
under Alexander the Great in the late fourth century B.C., power finally
made its first shift irrevocably westward. It shifted farther west with
Rome's conquest of Greece in the second century B.c., and after the fall of
the Roman Empire it eventually moved again, to western and northern
Europe.
The major factor behind these shifts becomes obvious as soon as one
compares the modern Fertile Crescent with ancient descriptions of it.
Today, the expressions "Fertile Crescent" and "world leader in food pro
duction" are absurd. Large areas of the former Fertile Crescent are now
desert, semidesert, steppe, or heavily eroded or salinized terrain unsuited
for agriculture. Today's ephemeral wealth of some of the region's nations,
based on the single nonrenewable resource of oil, conceals the region's
long-standing fundamental poverty and difficulty in feeding itself.
In ancient times, however, much of the Fertile Crescent and eastern
Mediterranean region, including Greece, was covered with forest. The
region's transformation from fertile woodland to eroded scrub or desert