2 2 2 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
parts of words; and determinatives, which were not pronounced but were
used to resolve ambiguities. Nevertheless, the phonetic signs in Sumerian
writing fell far short of a complete syllabary or alphabet. Some Sumerian
syllables lacked any written signs; the same sign could be pronounced in
different ways; and the same sign could variously be read as a word, a
syllable, or a letter.
Besides Sumerian cuneiform, the other certain instance of independent
origins of writing in human history comes from Native American societies
of Mesoamerica, probably southern Mexico. Mesoamerican writing is
believed to have arisen independently of Old World writing, because there
is no convincing evidence for pre-Norse contact of New World societies
with Old World societies possessing writing. In addition, the forms of Me
soamerican writing signs were entirely different from those of any Old
World script. About a dozen Mesoamerican scripts are known, all or most
of them apparently related to each other (for example, in their numerical
and calendrical systems), and most of them still only partially deciphered.
At the moment, the earliest preserved Mesoamerican script is from the
Zapotec area of southern Mexico around 600 B.C., but by far the best-
understood one is of the Lowland Maya region, where the oldest known
written date corresponds to A.D. 292.
Despite its independent origins and distinctive sign forms, Maya writing
is organized on principles basically similar to those of Sumerian writing
and other western Eurasian writing systems that Sumerian inspired. Like
Sumerian, Maya writing used both logograms and phonetic signs. Logo
grams for abstract words were often derived by the rebus principle. That
is, an abstract word was written with the sign for another word pro
nounced similarly but with a different meaning that could be readily
depicted. Like the signs of Japan's kana and Mycenaean Greece's Linear B
syllabaries, Maya phonetic signs were mostly signs for syllables of one
consonant plus one vowel (such as ta, te, ti, to, tu). Like letters of the early
Semitic alphabet, Maya syllabic signs were derived from pictures of the
object whose pronunciation began with that syllable (for example, the
Maya syllabic sign "ne" resembles a tail, for which the Maya word is neb).
All of these parallels between Mesoamerican and ancient western Eur
asian writing testify to the underlying universality of human creativity.
While Sumerian and Mesoamerican languages bear no special relation to
each other among the world's languages, both raised similar basic issues
in reducing them to writing. The solutions that Sumerians invented before