A NATURAL EXPERIMENT OF HISTORY • 65
which lacked granite, flint, and other continental rocks but did at least
have volcanic rocks, which Polynesians worked into ground or polished
stone adzes used to clear land for farming.
As for the types of artifacts made, the Chatham Islanders required little
more than hand-held clubs and sticks to kill seals, birds, and lobsters.
Most other islanders produced a diverse array of fishhooks, adzes, jewelry,
and other objects. On the atolls, as on the Chathams, those artifacts were
small, relatively simple, and individually produced and owned, while
architecture consisted of nothing more than simple huts. Large and densely
populated islands supported craft specialists who produced a wide range
of prestige goods for chiefs—such as the feather capes reserved for Hawai
ian chiefs and made of tens of thousands of bird feathers.
The largest products of Polynesia were the immense stone structures of
a few islands—the famous giant statues of Easter Island, the tombs of Ton¬
gan chiefs, the ceremonial platforms of the Marquesas, and the temples of
Hawaii and the Societies. This monumental Polynesian architecture was
obviously evolving in the same direction as the pyramids of Egypt, Meso
potamia, Mexico, and Peru. Naturally, Polynesia's structures are not on
the scale of those pyramids, but that merely reflects the fact that Egyptian
pharaohs could draw conscript labor from a much larger human popula
tion than could the chief of any Polynesian island. Even so, the Easter
Islanders managed to erect 30-ton stone statues—no mean feat for an
island with only 7,000 people, who had no power source other than their
own muscles.
THUS, POLYNESIAN ISLAND societies differed greatly in their eco
nomic specialization, social complexity, political organization, and mate
rial products, related to differences in population size and density, related
in turn to differences in island area, fragmentation, and isolation and in
opportunities for subsistence and for intensifying food production. All
those differences among Polynesian societies developed, within a relatively
short time and modest fraction of the Earth's surface, as environmentally
related variations on a single ancestral society. Those categories of cultural
differences within Polynesia are essentially the same categories that
emerged everywhere else in the world.
Of course, the range of variation over the rest of the globe is much
greater than that within Polynesia. While modern continental peoples