242 GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
change. That's the impression of many Westerners who have attempted to
help Third World peoples and ended up discouraged. The people seem
perfectly intelligent as individuals; the problem seems instead to lie with
their societies. How else can one explain why the Aborigines of northeast
ern Australia failed to adopt bows and arrows, which they saw being used
by Torres Straits islanders with whom they traded? Might all the societies
of an entire continent be unreceptive, thereby explaining technology's slow
pace of development there? In this chapter we shall finally come to grips
with a central problem of this book: the question of why technology did
evolve at such different rates on different continents.
THE STARTING POINT for our discussion is the common view expressed
in the saying "Necessity is the mother of invention." That is, inventions
supposedly arise when a society has an unfulfilled need: some technology
is widely recognized to be unsatisfactory or limiting. Would-be inventors,
motivated by the prospect of money or fame, perceive the need and try to
meet it. Some inventor finally comes up with a solution superior to the
existing, unsatisfactory technology. Society adopts the solution if it is com
patible with the society's values and other technologies.
Quite a few inventions do conform to this commonsense view of neces
sity as invention's mother. In 1942, in the middle of World War II, the U.S.
government set up the Manhattan Project with the explicit goal of
inventing the technology required to build an atomic bomb before Nazi
Germany could do so. That project succeeded in three years, at a cost of
$2 billion (equivalent to over $20 billion today). Other instances are Eli
Whitney's 1794 invention of his cotton gin to replace laborious hand
cleaning of cotton grown in the U.S. South, and James Watt's 1769 inven
tion of his steam engine to solve the problem of pumping water out of
British coal mines.
These familiar examples deceive us into assuming that other major
inventions were also responses to perceived needs. In fact, many or most
inventions were developed by people driven by curiosity or by a love of
tinkering, in the absence of any initial demand for the product they had in
mind. Once a device had been invented, the inventor then had to find an
application for it. Only after it had been in use for a considerable time did
consumers come to feel that they "needed" it. Still other devices, invented
to serve one purpose, eventually found most of their use for other, unantic-