318 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
killed off most of the native peoples of Australia and the Americas. One
lucky break for New Guineans was that there were no permanent Euro
pean settlements in New Guinea until the 1880s, by which time public
health discoveries had made progress in bringing smallpox and other infec
tious diseases of European populations under control. In addition, the
Austronesian expansion had already been bringing a stream of Indonesian
settlers and traders to New Guinea for 3,500 years. Since Asian mainland
infectious diseases were well established in Indonesia, New Guineans
thereby gained long exposure and built up much more resistance to Eur
asian germs than did Aboriginal Australians.
The sole part of New Guinea where Europeans do not suffer from
severe health problems is the highlands, above the altitudinal ceiling for
malaria. But the highlands, already occupied by dense populations of New
Guineans, were not reached by Europeans until the 1930s. By then, the
Australian and Dutch colonial governments were no longer willing to open
up lands for white settlement by killing native people in large numbers or
driving them off their lands, as had happened during earlier centuries of
European colonialism.
The remaining obstacle to European would-be settlers was that Euro
pean crops, livestock, and subsistence methods do poorly everywhere in
the New Guinea environment and climate. While introduced tropical
American crops such as squash, corn, and tomatoes are now grown in
small quantities, and tea and coffee plantations have been established in
the highlands of Papua New Guinea, staple European crops, like wheat,
barley, and peas, have never taken hold. Introduced cattle and goats, kept
in small numbers, suffer from tropical diseases, just as do European people
themselves. Food production in New Guinea is still dominated by the
crops and agricultural methods that New Guineans perfected over the
course of thousands of years.
All those problems of disease, rugged terrain, and subsistence contrib
uted to Europeans' leaving eastern New Guinea (now the independent
nation of Papua New Guinea) occupied and governed by New Guineans,
who nevertheless use English as their official language, write with the
alphabet, live under democratic governmental institutions modeled on
those of England, and use guns manufactured overseas. The outcome was
different in western New Guinea, which Indonesia took over from Hol
land in 1963 and renamed Irian Jaya province. The province is now gov
erned by Indonesians, for Indonesians. Its rural population is still