FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 283
states. However, we now know that, as of A.D. 1492, much of the world
was instead organized into chiefdoms, tribes, or bands. State formation
does demand an explanation.
The next theory is the most familiar one. The French philosopher Jean-
Jacques Rousseau speculated that states are formed by a social contract, a
rational decision reached when people calculated their self-interest, came
to the agreement that they would be better off in a state than in simpler
societies, and voluntarily did away with their simpler societies. But obser
vation and historical records have failed to uncover a single case of a state's
being formed in that ethereal atmosphere of dispassionate farsightedness.
Smaller units do not voluntarily abandon their sovereignty and merge into
larger units. They do so only by conquest, or under external duress.
A third theory, still popular with some historians and economists, sets
out from the undoubted fact that, in both Mesopotamia and North China
and Mexico, large-scale irrigation systems began to be constructed around
the time that states started to emerge. The theory also notes that any big,
complex system for irrigation or hydraulic management requires a central
ized bureaucracy to construct and maintain it. The theory then turns an
observed rough correlation in time into a postulated chain of cause and
effect. Supposedly, Mesopotamians and North Chinese and Mexicans
foresaw the advantages that a large-scale irrigation system would bring
them, even though there was at the time no such system within thousands
of miles (or anywhere on Earth) to illustrate for them those advantages.
Those farsighted people chose to merge their inefficient little chiefdoms
into a larger state capable of blessing them with large-scale irrigation.
However, this "hydraulic theory" of state formation is subject to the
same objections leveled against social contract theories in general. More
specifically, it addresses only the final stage in the evolution of complex
societies. It says nothing about what drove the progression from bands to
tribes to chiefdoms during all the millennia before the prospect of large-
scale irrigation loomed up on the horizon. When historical or archaeologi
cal dates are examined in detail, they fail to support the view of irrigation
as the driving force for state formation. In Mesopotamia, North China,
Mexico, and Madagascar, small-scale irrigation systems already existed
before the rise of states. Construction of large-scale irrigation systems did
not accompany the emergence of states but came only significantly later in
each of those areas. In most of the states formed over the Maya area of