LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK • 201
against the different strain that arrived this year. Malaria and sleeping
sickness are even more slippery customers in their ability rapidly to change
their antigens. Among the slipperiest of all is AIDS, which evolves new
antigens even as it sits within an individual patient, thereby eventually
overwhelming his or her immune system.
Our slowest defensive response is through natural selection, which
changes our gene frequencies from generation to generation. For almost
any disease, some people prove to be genetically more resistant than are
others. In an epidemic those people with genes for resistance to that partic
ular microbe are more likely to survive than are people lacking such genes.
As a result, over the course of history, human populations repeatedly
exposed to a particular pathogen have come to consist of a higher propor
tion of individuals with those genes for resistance—just because unfortu
nate individuals without the genes were less likely to survive to pass their
genes on to babies.
Fat consolation, you may be thinking again. This evolutionary response
is not one that does the genetically susceptible dying individual any good.
It does mean, though, that a human population as a whole becomes better
protected against the pathogen. Examples of those genetic defenses include
the protections (at a price) that the sickle-cell gene, Tay-Sachs gene, and
cystic fibrosis gene may confer on African blacks, Ashkenazi Jews, and
northern Europeans against malaria, tuberculosis, and bacterial diarrheas,
respectively.
In short, our interaction with most species, as exemplified by humming
birds, doesn't make us or the hummingbird "sick." Neither we nor hum
mingbirds have had to evolve defenses against each other. That peaceful
relationship was able to persist because hummingbirds don't count on us
to spread their babies or to offer our bodies for food. Hummingbirds
evolved instead to feed on nectar and insects, which they find by using
their own wings.
But microbes evolved to feed on the nutrients within our own bodies,
and they don't have wings to let them reach a new victim's body once the
original victim is dead or resistant. Hence many germs have had to evolve
tricks to let them spread between potential victims, and many of those
tricks are what we experience as "symptoms of disease." We've evolved
countertricks of our own, to which the germs have responded by evolving
counter-countertricks. We and our pathogens are now locked in an escalat-