4 3 6 " FURTHER READINGS
papers describe the changes that evolve automatically in wild plants under
human cultivation: Mark Blunder and Roger Byrne, "The ecological genet
ics of domestication and the origins of agriculture," Current Anthropology
32:23-54 (1991); Charles Heiser, Jr., "Aspects of unconscious selection
and the evolution of domesticated plants," Euphytica 37:77-81 (1988);
and Daniel Zohary, "Modes of evolution in plants under domestication,"
in W. F. Grant, ed., Plant Biosystematics (Montreal: Academic Press,
1984). Mark Blumler, "Independent inventionism and recent genetic evi
dence on plant domestication," Economic Botany 46:98-111 (1992), eval
uates the evidence for multiple domestications of the same wild plant
species, as opposed to single origins followed by spread.
Among writings of general interest in connection with animal domesti
cation, the standard encyclopedic reference work to the world's wild mam
mals is Ronald Nowak, ed., Walker's Mammals of the World, 5th ed.
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991). Juliet Clutton-Brock,
Domesticated Animals from Early Times (London: British Museum [Natu
ral History], 1981), gives an excellent summary of all important domesti
cated mammals. I. L. Mason, ed., Evolution of Domesticated Animals
(London: Longman, 1984), is a multi-author volume discussing each sig
nificant domesticated animal individually. Simon Davis, The Archaeology
of Animals (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1987), provides an excel
lent account of what can be learned from mammal bones in archaeological
sites. Juliet Clutton-Brock, ed., The Walking Larder (London: Unwin-
Hyman, 1989), presents 31 papers about how humans have domesticated,
herded, hunted, and been hunted by animals around the world. A compre
hensive book in German about domesticated animals is Wolf Herre and
Manfred Rohrs, Haustiere zoologisch gesehen (Stuttgart: Fischer, 1990).
Stephen Budiansky, The Covenant of the Wild (New York: William Mor
row, 1992), is a popular account of how animal domestication evolved
automatically from relationships between humans and animals. An
important paper on how domestic animals became used for plowing,
transport, wool, and milk is Andrew Sheratt, "Plough and pastoralism:
Aspects of the secondary products revolution," pp. 261-305 in Ian Hod-
der et al., eds., Pattern of the Past (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981).
Accounts of food production in particular areas of the world include a
deliciously detailed mini-encyclopedia of Roman agricultural practices,
Pliny, Natural History, vols. 17-19 (Latin text side-by-side with English