2 I 2 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
genetic resistance. Smallpox, measles, influenza, and typhus competed for
top rank among the killers. As if these had not been enough, diphtheria,
malaria, mumps, pertussis, plague, tuberculosis, and yellow fever came up
close behind. In countless cases, whites were actually there to witness the
destruction occurring when the germs arrived. For example, in 1837 the
Mandan Indian tribe, with one of the most elaborate cultures in our Great
Plains, contracted smallpox from a steamboat traveling up the Missouri
River from St. Louis. The population of one Mandan village plummeted
from 2,000 to fewer than 40 within a few weeks.
WHILE OVER A dozen major infectious diseases of Old World origins
became established in the New World, perhaps not a single major killer
reached Europe from the Americas. The sole possible exception is syphilis,
whose area of origin remains controversial. The one-sidedness of that
exchange of germs becomes even more striking when we recall that large,
dense human populations are a prerequisite for the evolution of our crowd
infectious diseases. If recent reappraisals of the pre-Columbian New World
population are correct, it was not far below the contemporary population
of Eurasia. Some New World cities like Tenochtitlan were among the
world's most populous cities at the time. Why didn't Tenochtitlan have
awful germs waiting for the Spaniards?
One possible contributing factor is that the rise of dense human popula
tions began somewhat later in the New World than in the Old World.
Another is that the three most densely populated American centers—the
Andes, Mesoamerica, and the Mississippi Valley—never became connected
by regular fast trade into one huge breeding ground for microbes, in the
way that Europe, North Africa, India, and China became linked in Roman
times. Those factors still don't explain, though, why the New World
apparently ended up with no lethal crowd epidemics at all. (Tuberculosis
DNA has been reported from the mummy of a Peruvian Indian who died
1,000 years ago, but the identification procedure used did not distinguish
human tuberculosis from a closely related pathogen (Mycobacterium
bovis) that is widespread in wild animals.)
Instead, what must be the main reason for the failure of lethal crowd
epidemics to arise in the Americas becomes clear when we pause to ask a
simple question. From what microbes could they conceivably have
evolved? We've seen that Eurasian crowd diseases evolved out of diseases