210 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
For a similar example in humans, we have only to consider the surpris
ing evolution of syphilis. Today, our two immediate associations to syphilis
are genital sores and a very slowly developing disease, leading to the death
of many untreated victims only after many years. However, when syphilis
was first definitely recorded in Europe in 1495, its pustules often covered
the body from the head to the knees, caused flesh to fall off people's faces,
and led to death within a few months. By 1546, syphilis had evolved into
the disease with the symptoms so well known to us today. Apparently, just
as with myxomatosis, those syphilis spirochetes that evolved so as to keep
their victims alive for longer were thereby able to transmit their spirochete
offspring into more victims.
THE IMPORTANCE OF lethal microbes in human history is well illus
trated by Europeans' conquest and depopulation of the New World. Far
more Native Americans died in bed from Eurasian germs than on the bat
tlefield from European guns and swords. Those germs undermined Indian
resistance by killing most Indians and their leaders and by sapping the
survivors' morale. For instance, in 1519 Cortes landed on the coast of
Mexico with 600 Spaniards, to conquer the fiercely militaristic Aztec
Empire with a population of many millions. That Cortes reached the Aztec
capital of Tenochtitlan, escaped with the loss of "only" two-thirds of his
force, and managed to fight his way back to the coast demonstrates both
Spanish military advantages and the initial naivete of the Aztecs. But when
Cortes's next onslaught came, the Aztecs were no longer naive and fought
street by street with the utmost tenacity. What gave the Spaniards a deci
sive advantage was smallpox, which reached Mexico in 1520 with one
infected slave arriving from Spanish Cuba. The resulting epidemic pro
ceeded to kill nearly half of the Aztecs, including Emperor Cuitlahuac.
Aztec survivors were demoralized by the mysterious illness that killed Indi
ans and spared Spaniards, as if advertising the Spaniards' invincibility. By
1618, Mexico's initial population of about 20 million had plummeted to
about 1.6 million.
Pizarro had similarly grim luck when he landed on the coast of Peru in
1531 with 168 men to conquer the Inca Empire of millions. Fortunately
for Pizarro and unfortunately for the Incas, smallpox had arrived overland
around 1526, killing much of the Inca population, including both the
emperor Huayna Capac and his designated successor. As we saw in Chap-