SPACIOUS SKIES AND TILTED AXES • 189
the failure of tropical Indonesian and New Guinean food production to
arrive in prehistoric times in the modern farmlands of southwestern and
southeastern Australia, respectively. Those two corners of Australia are
now the continent's breadbaskets, but they lie more than 2,000 miles south
of the equator. Farming there had to await the arrival from faraway
Europe, on European ships, of crops adapted to Europe's cool climate and
short growing season.
1 HAVE BEEN dwelling on latitude, readily assessed by a glance at a map,
because it is a major determinant of climate, growing conditions, and ease
of spread of food production. However, latitude is of course not the only
such determinant, and it is not always true that adjacent places at the same
latitude have the same climate (though they do necessarily have the same
day length). Topographic and ecological barriers, much more pronounced
on some continents than on others, were locally important obstacles to
diffusion.
For instance, crop diffusion between the U.S. Southeast and Southwest
was very slow and selective although these two regions are at the same
latitude. That's because much of the intervening area of Texas and the
southern Great Plains was dry and unsuitable for agriculture. A corres
ponding example within Eurasia involved the eastern limit of Fertile Cres
cent crops, which spread rapidly westward to the Atlantic Ocean and
eastward to the Indus Valley without encountering a major barrier. How
ever, farther eastward in India the shift from predominantly winter rainfall
to predominantly summer rainfall contributed to a much more delayed
extension of agriculture, involving different crops and farming techniques,
into the Ganges plain of northeastern India. Still farther east, temperate
areas of China were isolated from western Eurasian areas with similar
climates by the combination of the Central Asian desert, Tibetan plateau,
and Himalayas. The initial development of food production in China was
therefore independent of that at the same latitude in the Fertile Crescent,
and gave rise to entirely different crops. However, even those barriers
between China and western Eurasia were at least partly overcome during
the second millennium B.C., when West Asian wheat, barley, and horses
reached China.
By the same token, the potency of a 2,000-mile north-south shift as a
barrier also varies with local conditions. Fertile Crescent food production