74 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
greater kingdoms than yours, and have defeated other more powerful
lords than you, imposing upon them the dominion of the Emperor, whose
vassal I am, and who is King of Spain and of the universal world. We come
to conquer this land by his command, that all may come to a knowledge
of God and of His Holy Catholic Faith; and by reason of our good mis
sion, God, the Creator of heaven and earth and of all things in them, per
mits this, in order that you may know Him and come out from the bestial
and diabolical life that you lead. It is for this reason that we, being so few
in number, subjugate that vast host. When you have seen the errors in
which you live, you will understand the good that we have done you by
coming to your land by order of his Majesty the King of Spain. Our Lord
permitted that your pride should be brought low and that no Indian
should be able to offend a Christian.' "
LET US NOW trace the chain of causation in this extraordinary confron
tation, beginning with the immediate events. When Pizarro and Atahuallpa
met at Cajamarca, why did Pizarro capture Atahuallpa and kill so many
of his followers, instead of Atahuallpa's vastly more numerous forces cap
turing and killing Pizarro? After all, Pizarro had only 62 soldiers mounted
on horses, along with 106 foot soldiers, while Atahuallpa commanded an
army of about 80,000. As for the antecedents of those events, how did
Atahuallpa come to be at Cajamarca at all? How did Pizarro come to be
there to capture him, instead of Atahuallpa's coming to Spain to capture
King Charles I? Why did Atahuallpa walk into what seems to us, with the
gift of hindsight, to have been such a transparent trap? Did the factors
acting in the encounter of Atahuallpa and Pizarro also play a broader role
in encounters between Old World and New World peoples and between
other peoples?
Why did Pizarro capture Atahuallpa? Pizarro's military advantages lay
in the Spaniards' steel swords and other weapons, steel armor, guns, and
horses. To those weapons, Atahuallpa's troops, without animals on which
to ride into battle, could oppose only stone, bronze, or wooden clubs,
maces, and hand axes, plus slingshots and quilted armor. Such imbalances
of equipment were decisive in innumerable other confrontations of Euro
peans with Native Americans and other peoples.
The sole Native Americans able to resist European conquest for many