286 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
the nomads to settle in villages, so that the missionaries and bureaucrats
can find the nomads, bring them services such as medical care and schools,
and proselytize and control them.
THUS, FOOD PRODUCTION, which increases population size, also acts
in many ways to make features of complex societies possible. But that
doesn't prove that food production and large populations make complex
societies inevitable. How can we account for the empirical observation
that band or tribal organization just does not work for societies of hun
dreds of thousands of people, and that all existing large societies have
complex centralized organization? We can cite at least four obvious rea
sons.
One reason is the problem of conflict between unrelated strangers. That
problem grows astronomically as the number of people making up the
society increases. Relationships within a band of 20 people involve only
190 two-person interactions (20 people times 19 divided by 2), but a band
of 2,000 would have 1,999,000 dyads. Each of those dyads represents a
potential time bomb that could explode in a murderous argument. Each
murder in band and tribal societies usually leads to an attempted revenge
killing, starting one more unending cycle of murder and countermurder
that destabilizes the society.
In a band, where everyone is closely related to everyone else, people
related simultaneously to both quarreling parties step in to mediate quar
rels. In a tribe, where many people are still close relatives and everyone at
least knows everybody else by name, mutual relatives and mutual friends
mediate the quarrel. But once the threshold of "several hundred," below
which everyone can know everyone else, has been crossed, increasing num
bers of dyads become pairs of unrelated strangers. When strangers fight,
few people present will be friends or relatives of both combatants, with
self-interest in stopping the fight. Instead, many onlookers will be friends
or relatives of only one combatant and will side with that person, escalat
ing the two-person fight into a general brawl. Hence a large society that
continues to leave conflict resolution to all of its members is guaranteed to
blow up. That factor alone would explain why societies of thousands can
exist only if they develop centralized authority to monopolize force and
resolve conflicts.
A second reason is the growing impossibility of communal decision