YALI'S QUESTION " I 5
New Guinean and that of the average European or American. Comparable
differences separate the lifestyles of other peoples of the world as well.
Those huge disparities must have potent causes that one might think
would be obvious.
Yet Yali's apparently simple question is a difficult one to answer. I didn't
have an answer then. Professional historians still disagree about the solu
tion; most are no longer even asking the question. In the years since Yali
and I had that conversation, I have studied and written about other aspects
of human evolution, history, and language. This book, written twenty-five
years later, attempts to answer Yali.
ALTHOUGH YALI'S QUESTION concerned only the contrasting life
styles of New Guineans and of European whites, it can be extended to a
larger set of contrasts within the modern world. Peoples of Eurasian ori
gin, especially those still living in Europe and eastern Asia, plus those
transplanted to North America, dominate the modern world in wealth and
power. Other peoples, including most Africans, have thrown off European
colonial domination but remain far behind in wealth and power. Still other
peoples, such as the aboriginal inhabitants of Australia, the Americas, and
southernmost Africa, are no longer even masters of their own lands but
have been decimated, subjugated, and in some cases even exterminated by
European colonialists.
Thus, questions about inequality in the modern world can be reformu
lated as follows. Why did wealth and power become distributed as they
now are, rather than in some other way? For instance, why weren't Native
Americans, Africans, and Aboriginal Australians the ones who decimated,
subjugated, or exterminated Europeans and Asians?
We can easily push this question back one step. As of the year A.D.
1500, when Europe's worldwide colonial expansion was just beginning,
peoples on different continents already differed greatly in technology and
political organization. Much of Europe, Asia, and North Africa was the
site of metal-equipped states or empires, some of them on the threshold of
industrialization. Two Native American peoples, the Aztecs and the Incas,
ruled over empires with stone tools. Parts of sub-Saharan Africa were
divided among small states or chiefdoms with iron tools. Most other peo
ples—including all those of Australia and New Guinea, many Pacific