HOW TO MAKE AN ALMOND • I I 7
them. Human latrines, like those of aardvarks, may have been a testing
ground of the first unconscious crop breeders.
LATRINES ARE MERELY one of the many places where we accidentally
sow the seeds of wild plants that we eat. When we gather edible wild
plants and bring them home, some spill en route or at our houses. Some
fruit rots while still containing perfectly good seeds, and gets thrown out
uneaten into the garbage. As parts of the fruit that we actually take into
our mouths, strawberry seeds are tiny and inevitably swallowed and defe
cated, but other seeds are large enough to be spat out. Thus, our spittoons
and garbage dumps joined our latrines to form the first agricultural
research laboratories.
At whichever such "lab" the seeds ended up, they tended to come from
only certain individuals of edible plants—namely, those that we preferred
to eat for one reason or another. From your berry-picking days, you know
that you select particular berries or berry bushes. Eventually, when the first
farmers began to sow seeds deliberately, they would inevitably sow those
from the plants they had chosen to gather, even though they didn't under
stand the genetic principle that big berries have seeds likely to grow into
bushes yielding more big berries.
So, when you wade into a thorny thicket amid the mosquitoes on a hot,
humid day, you don't do it for just any strawberry bush. Even if uncon
sciously, you decide which bush looks most promising, and whether it's
worth it at all. What are your unconscious criteria?
One criterion, of course, is size. You prefer large berries, because it's
not worth your while to get sunburned and mosquito bitten for some lousy
little berries. That provides part of the explanation why many crop plants
have much bigger fruits than their wild ancestors do. It's especially familiar
to us that supermarket strawberries and blueberries are gigantic compared
with wild ones; those differences arose only in recent centuries.
Such size differences in other plants go back to the very beginnings of
agriculture, when cultivated peas evolved through human selection to be
10 times heavier than wild peas. The little wild peas had been collected
by hunter-gatherers for thousands of years, just as we collect little wild
blueberries today, before the preferential harvesting and planting of the
most appealing largest wild peas—that is, what we call farming—began
automatically to contribute to increases in average pea size from genera-