TO FARM OR NOT TO FARM • 107
sago trees. Aboriginal Australians who never reached the stage of farming
yams and seed plants nonetheless anticipated several elements of farming.
They managed the landscape by burning it, to encourage the growth of
edible seed plants that sprout after fires. In gathering wild yams, they cut
off most of the edible tuber but replaced the stems and tops of the tubers
in the ground so that the tubers would regrow. Their digging to extract
the tuber loosened and aerated the soil and fostered regrowth. All that
they would have had to do to meet the definition of farmers was to carry
the stems and remaining attached tubers home and similarly replace them
in soil at their camp.
FROM THOSE PRECURSORS of food production already practiced by
hunter-gatherers, it developed stepwise. Not all the necessary techniques
were developed within a short time, and not all the wild plants and animals
that were eventually domesticated in a given area were domesticated
simultaneously. Even in the cases of the most rapid independent develop
ment of food production from a hunting-gathering lifestyle, it took thou
sands of years to shift from complete dependence on wild foods to a diet
with very few wild foods. In early stages of food production, people simul
taneously collected wild foods and raised cultivated ones, and diverse
types of collecting activities diminished in importance at different times as
reliance on crops increased.
The underlying reason why this transition was piecemeal is that food
production systems evolved as a result of the accumulation of many sepa
rate decisions about allocating time and effort. Foraging humans, like for
aging animals, have only finite time and energy, which they can spend in
various ways. We can picture an incipient farmer waking up and asking:
Shall I spend today hoeing my garden (predictably yielding a lot of vegeta
bles several months from now), gathering shellfish (predictably yielding a
little meat today), or hunting deer (yielding possibly a lot of meat today,
but more likely nothing) ? Human and animal foragers are constantly prio
ritizing and making effort-allocation decisions, even if only unconsciously.
They concentrate first on favorite foods, or ones that yield the highest
payoff. If these are unavailable, they shift to less and less preferred foods.
Many considerations enter into these decisions. People seek food in
order to satisfy their hunger and fill their bellies. They also crave specific
foods, such as protein-rich foods, fat, salt, sweet fruits, and foods that