LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK • 209
The final stage of this evolution is represented by the major, long-estab
lished epidemic diseases confined to humans. These diseases must have
been the evolutionary survivors of far more pathogens that tried to make
the jump to us from animals—and mostly failed.
What is actually going on in those stages, as an exclusive disease of
animals transforms itself into an exclusive disease of humans? One trans
formation involves a change of intermediate vector: when a microbe rely
ing on some arthropod vector for transmission switches to a new host, the
microbe may be forced to find a new arthropod as well. For example,
typhus was initially transmitted between rats by rat fleas, which sufficed
for a while to transfer typhus from rats to humans. Eventually, typhus
microbes discovered that human body lice offered a much more efficient
method of traveling directly between humans. Now that Americans have
mostly deloused themselves, typhus has discovered a new route into us: by
infecting eastern North American flying squirrels and then transferring to
people whose attics harbor flying squirrels.
In short, diseases represent evolution in progress, and microbes adapt
by natural selection to new hosts and vectors. But compared with cows'
bodies, ours offer different immune defenses, lice, feces, and chemistries.
In that new environment, a microbe must evolve new ways to live and to
propagate itself. In several instructive cases doctors or veterinarians have
actually been able to observe microbes evolving those new ways.
The best-studied case involves what happened when myxomatosis hit
Australian rabbits. The myxo virus, native to a wild species of Brazilian
rabbit, had been observed to cause a lethal epidemic in European domestic
rabbits, which are a different species. Hence the virus was intentionally
introduced to Australia in 1950 in the hopes of ridding the continent of its
plague of European rabbits, foolishly introduced in the nineteenth century.
In the first year, myxo produced a gratifying (to Australian farmers) 99.8
percent mortality rate in infected rabbits. Unfortunately for the farmers,
the death rate then dropped in the second year to 90 percent and eventu
ally to 25 percent, frustrating hopes of eradicating rabbits completely from
Australia. The problem was that the myxo virus evolved to serve its own
interests, which differed from ours as well as from those of the rabbits.
The virus changed so as to kill fewer rabbits and to permit lethally infected
ones to live longer before dying. As a result, a less lethal myxo virus
spreads baby viruses to more rabbits than did the original, highly virulent
myxo.