148 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Archaeological evidence shows that the origins of New Guinea agricul
ture are ancient, dating to around 7000 B.C. At those early dates all the
landmasses surrounding New Guinea were still occupied exclusively by
hunter-gatherers, so this ancient agriculture must have developed indepen
dently in New Guinea. While unequivocal remains of crops have not been
recovered from those early fields, they are likely to have included some of
the same crops that were being grown in New Guinea at the time of Euro
pean colonization and that are now known to have been domesticated
locally from wild New Guinea ancestors. Foremost among these local
domesticates is the modern world's leading crop, sugarcane, of which the
annual tonnage produced today nearly equals that of the number two and
number three crops combined (wheat and corn). Other crops of
undoubted New Guinea origin are a group of bananas known as Aus¬
tralimusa bananas, the nut tree Canarium indicum, and giant swamp taro,
as well as various edible grass stems, roots, and green vegetables. The
breadfruit tree and the root crops yams and (ordinary) taro may also be
New Guinean domesticates, although that conclusion remains uncertain
because their wild ancestors are not confined to New Guinea but are dis
tributed from New Guinea to Southeast Asia. At present we lack evidence
that could resolve the question whether they were domesticated in South
east Asia, as traditionally assumed, or independently or even only in New
Guinea.
However, it turns out that New Guinea's biota suffered from three
severe limitations. First, no cereal crops were domesticated in New
Guinea, whereas several vitally important ones were domesticated in the
Fertile Crescent, Sahel, and China. In its emphasis instead on root and tree
crops, New Guinea carries to an extreme a trend seen in agricultural sys
tems in other wet tropical areas (the Amazon, tropical West Africa, and
Southeast Asia), whose farmers also emphasized root crops but did man
age to come up with at least two cereals (Asian rice and a giant-seeded
Asian cereal called Job's tears). A likely reason for the failure of cereal
agriculture to arise in New Guinea is a glaring deficiency of the wild start
ing material: not one of the world's 56 largest-seeded wild grasses is native
there.
Second, the New Guinea fauna included no domesticable large mammal
species whatsoever. The sole domestic animals of modern New Guinea,
the pig and chicken and dog, arrived from Southeast Asia by way of Indo
nesia within the last several thousand years. As a result, while New Guinea