306 GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
lations. Still a third limitation was the reality that the mid-montane zone
between 4,000 and 9,000 feet was the sole altitudinal zone in New Guinea
suitable for intensive food production. There was no food production at
all in New Guinea alpine habitats above 9,000 feet, little on the hillslopes
between 4,000 and 1,000 feet, and only low-density slash-and-burn agri
culture in the lowlands. Thus, large-scale economic exchanges of food,
between communities at different altitudes specializing in different types
of food production, never developed in New Guinea. Such exchanges in
the Andes, Alps, and Himalayas not only increased population densities in
those areas, by providing people at all altitudes with a more balanced diet,
but also promoted regional economic and political integration.
For all these reasons, the population of traditional New Guinea never
exceeded 1,000,000 until European colonial governments brought West
ern medicine and the end of intertribal warfare. Of the approximately nine
world centers of agricultural origins that we discussed in Chapter 5, New
Guinea remained the one with by far the smallest population. With a mere
1,000,000 people, New Guinea could not develop the technology, writing,
and political systems that arose among populations of tens of millions in
China, the Fertile Crescent, the Andes, and Mesoamerica.
New Guinea's population is not only small in aggregate, but also frag
mented into thousands of micropopulations by the rugged terrain: swamps
in much of the lowlands, steep-sided ridges and narrow canyons alternat
ing with each other in the highlands, and dense jungle swathing both the
lowlands and the highlands. When I am engaged in biological exploration
in New Guinea, with teams of New Guineans as field assistants, I consider
excellent progress to be three miles per day even if we are traveling over
existing trails. Most highlanders in traditional New Guinea never went
more than 10 miles from home in the course of their lives.
Those difficulties of terrain, combined with the state of intermittent
warfare that characterized relations between New Guinea bands or vil
lages, account for traditional New Guinea's linguistic, cultural, and politi
cal fragmentation. New Guinea has by far the highest concentration of
languages in the world: 1,000 out of the world's 6,000 languages,
crammed into an area only slightly larger than that of Texas, and divided
into dozens of language families and isolated languages as different from
each other as English is from Chinese. Nearly half of all New Guinea lan
guages have fewer than 500 speakers, and even the largest language groups
(still with a mere 100,000 speakers) were politically fragmented into hun-