APPLES OR INDIANS • 1 33
plant in modern times suggests that ancient peoples really may have
explored virtually all useful wild plants and domesticated all the ones
worth domesticating.
Yet some of the world's failures to domesticate wild plants remain hard
to explain. The most flagrant cases concern plants that were domesticated
in one area but not in another. We can thus be sure that it was indeed
possible to develop the wild plant into a useful crop, and we have to ask
why that wild species was not domesticated in certain areas.
A typical puzzling example comes from Africa. The important cereal
sorghum was domesticated in Africa's Sahel zone, just south of the Sahara.
It also occurs as a wild plant as far south as southern Africa, yet neither it
nor any other plant was cultivated in southern Africa until the arrival of
the whole crop package that Bantu farmers brought from Africa north of
the equator 2,000 years ago. Why did the native peoples of southern
Africa not domesticate sorghum for themselves?
Equally puzzling is the failure of people to domesticate flax in its wild
range in western Europe and North Africa, or einkorn wheat in its wild
range in the southern Balkans. Since these two plants were among the first
eight crops of the Fertile Crescent, they were presumably among the most
readily domesticated of all wild plants. They were adopted for cultivation
in those areas of their wild range outside the Fertile Crescent as soon as
they arrived with the whole package of food production from the Fertile
Crescent. Why, then, had peoples of those outlying areas not already
begun to grow them of their own accord?
Similarly, the four earliest domesticated fruits of the Fertile Crescent all
had wild ranges stretching far beyond the eastern Mediterranean, where
they appear to have been first domesticated: the olive, grape, and fig
occurred west to Italy and Spain and Northwest Africa, while the date
palm extended to all of North Africa and Arabia. These four were evi
dently among the easiest to domesticate of all wild fruits. Why did peoples
outside the Fertile Crescent fail to domesticate them, and begin to grow
them only when they had already been domesticated in the eastern Medi
terranean and arrived thence as crops?
Other striking examples involve wild species that were not domesti
cated in areas where food production never arose spontaneously, even
though those wild species had close relatives domesticated elsewhere. For
example, the olive Olea europea was domesticated in the eastern Mediter
ranean. There are about 40 other species of olives in tropical and southern