HEMISPHERES COLLIDING • 361
Table 18.1 summarizes approximate dates of the appearance of key
developments in the main "homelands" of each hemisphere (the Fertile
Crescent and China in Eurasia, the Andes and Amazonia and Mesoamer
ica in the Americas). It also includes the trajectory for the minor New
World homeland of the eastern United States, and that for England, which
is not a homeland at all but is listed to illustrate how rapidly developments
spread from the Fertile Crescent.
This table is sure to horrify any knowledgeable scholar, because it
reduces exceedingly complex histories to a few seemingly precise dates. In
reality, all of those dates are merely attempts to label arbitrary points along
a continuum. For example, more significant than the date of the first metal
tool found by some archaeologist is the time when a significant fraction of
all tools was made of metal, but how common must metal tools be to rate
as "widespread"? Dates for the appearance of the same development may
differ among different parts of the same homeland. For instance, within
the Andean region pottery appears about 1,300 years earlier in coastal
Ecuador (3100 B.c.) than in Peru (1800 B.c.). Some dates, such as those
for the rise of chiefdoms, are more difficult to infer from the archaeological
record than are dates of artifacts like pottery or metal tools. Some of the
dates in Table 18.1 are very uncertain, especially those for the onset of
American food production. Nevertheless, as long as one understands that
the table is a simplification, it is useful for comparing continental histories.
The table suggests that food production began to provide a large frac
tion of human diets around 5,000 years earlier in the Eurasian homelands
than in those of the Americas. A caveat must be mentioned immediately:
while there is no doubt about the antiquity of food production in Eurasia,
there is controversy about its onset in the Americas. In particular, archae
ologists often cite considerably older claimed dates for domesticated plants
at Coxcatlan Cave in Mexico, at Guitarrero Cave in Peru, and at some
other American sites than the dates given in the table. Those claims are
now being reevaluated for several reasons: recent direct radiocarbon dat
ing of crop remains themselves has in some cases been yielding younger
dates; the older dates previously reported were based instead on charcoal
thought to be contemporaneous with the plant remains, but possibly not
so; and the status of some of the older plant remains as crops or just as
collected wild plants is uncertain. Still, even if plant domestication did
begin earlier in the Americas than the dates shown in Table 18.1, agricul-