280 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
disposed toward defeated enemies but because the greater economic spe
cialization of states, with more mass production and more public works,
provided more uses for slave labor. In addition, the larger scale of state
warfare made more captives available.
A chiefdom's one or two levels of administration are greatly multiplied
in states, as anyone who has seen an organizational chart of any govern
ment knows. Along with the proliferation of vertical levels of bureaucrats,
there is also horizontal specialization. Instead of konohiki carrying out
every aspect of administration for a Hawaiian district, state governments
have several separate departments, each with its own hierarchy, to handle
water management, taxes, military draft, and so on. Even small states have
more complex bureaucracies than large chiefdoms. For instance, the West
African state of Maradi had a central administration with over 130 titled
offices.
Internal conflict resolution within states has become increasingly for
malized by laws, a judiciary, and police. The laws are often written,
because many states (with conspicuous exceptions, such as that of the
Incas) have had literate elites, writing having been developed around the
same time as the formation of the earliest states in both Mesopotamia and
Mesoamerica. In contrast, no early chiefdom not on the verge of statehood
developed writing.
Early states had state religions and standardized temples. Many early
kings were considered divine and were accorded special treatment in innu
merable respects. For example, the Aztec and Inca emperors were both
carried about in litters; servants went ahead of the Inca emperor's litter
and swept the ground clear; and the Japanese language includes special
forms of the pronoun "you" for use only in addressing the emperor. Early
kings were themselves the head of the state religion or else had separate
high priests. The Mesopotamian temple was the center not only of religion
but also of economic redistribution, writing, and crafts technology.
All these features of states carry to an extreme the developments that
led from tribes to chiefdoms. In addition, though, states have diverged
from chiefdoms in several new directions. The most fundamental such dis
tinction is that states are organized on political and territorial lines, not on
the kinship lines that defined bands, tribes, and simple chiefdoms. Further
more, bands and tribes always, and chiefdoms usually, consist of a single
ethnic and linguistic group. States, though—especially so-called empires