FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY " 2 87
making with increasing population size. Decision making by the entire
adult population is still possible in New Guinea villages small enough that
news and information quickly spread to everyone, that everyone can hear
everyone else in a meeting of the whole village, and that everyone who
wants to speak at the meeting has the opportunity to do so. But all those
prerequisites for communal decision making become unattainable in much
larger communities. Even now, in these days of microphones and loud
speakers, we all know that a group meeting is no way to resolve issues for
a group of thousands of people. Hence a large society must be structured
and centralized if it is to reach decisions effectively.
A third reason involves economic considerations. Any society requires
means to transfer goods between its members. One individual may happen
to acquire more of some essential commodity on one day and less on
another. Because individuals have different talents, one individual consis
tently tends to wind up with an excess of some essentials and a deficit of
others. In small societies with few pairs of members, the resulting neces
sary transfers of goods can be arranged directly between pairs of individu
als or families, by reciprocal exchanges. But the same mathematics that
makes direct pairwise conflict resolution inefficient in large societies makes
direct pairwise economic transfers also inefficient. Large societies can
function economically only if they have a redistributive economy in addi
tion to a reciprocal economy. Goods in excess of an individual's needs
must be transferred from the individual to a centralized authority, which
then redistributes the goods to individuals with deficits.
A final consideration mandating complex organization for large socie
ties has to do with population densities. Large societies of food producers
have not only more members but also higher population densities than do
small bands of hunter-gatherers. Each band of a few dozen hunters occu
pies a large territory, within which they can acquire most of the resources
essential to them. They can obtain their remaining necessities by trading
with neighboring bands during intervals between band warfare. As popu
lation density increases, the territory of that band-sized population of a
few dozen would shrink to a small area, with more and more of life's
necessities having to be obtained outside the area. For instance, one
couldn't just divide Holland's 16,000 square miles and 16,000,000 people
into 800,000 individual territories, each encompassing 13 acres and serv
ing as home to an autonomous band of 20 people who remained self-
sufficient confined within their 13 acres, occasionally taking advantage of