BLUEPRINTS AND BORROWED LETTERS • 2 37
few societies, it then spread, by trade and conquest and religion, to other
societies with similar economies and political organizations.
While food production was thus a necessary condition for the evolution
or early adoption of writing, it was not a sufficient condition. At the begin
ning of this chapter, I mentioned the failure of some food-producing socie
ties with complex political organization to develop or adopt writing before
modern times. Those cases, initially so puzzling to us moderns accustomed
to viewing writing as indispensable to a complex society, included one of
the world's largest empires as of A.D. 1520, the Inca Empire of South
America. They also included Tonga's maritime proto-empire, the Hawai
ian state emerging in the late 18th century, all of the states and chiefdoms
of subequatorial Africa and sub-Saharan West Africa before the arrival
of Islam, and the largest native North American societies, those of the
Mississippi Valley and its tributaries. Why did all those societies fail to
acquire writing, despite their sharing prerequisites with societies that did
do so?
Here we have to remind ourselves that the vast majority of societies
with writing acquired it by borrowing it from neighbors or by being
inspired by them to develop it, rather than by independently inventing it
themselves. The societies without writing that I just mentioned are ones
that got a later start on food production than did Sumer, Mexico, and
China. (The only uncertainty in this statement concerns the relative dates
for the onset of food production in Mexico and in the Andes, the eventual
Inca realm.) Given enough time, the societies lacking writing might also
have eventually developed it on their own. Had they been located nearer
to Sumer, Mexico, and China, they might instead have acquired writing
or the idea of writing from those centers, just as did India, the Maya, and
most other societies with writing. But they were too far from the first cen
ters of writing to have acquired it before modern times.
The importance of isolation is most obvious for Hawaii and Tonga,
both of which were separated by at least 4,000 miles of ocean from the
nearest societies with writing. The other societies illustrate the important
point that distance as the crow flies is not an appropriate measure of isola
tion for humans. The Andes, West Africa's kingdoms, and the mouth of
the Mississippi River lay only about 1,200, 1,500, and 700 miles, respec
tively, from societies with writing in Mexico, North Africa, and Mexico,
respectively. These distances are considerably less than the distances the