THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE • 407
as environments permit) because of the processes illustrated in such simple
form by Maori New Zealand's Musket Wars. That is, societies initially
lacking an advantage either acquire it from societies possessing it or (if
they fail to do so) are replaced by those other societies.
Hence a second set of factors consists of those affecting rates of diffu
sion and migration, which differed greatly among continents. They were
most rapid in Eurasia, because of its east-west major axis and its relatively
modest ecological and geographical barriers. The reasoning is straightfor
ward for movements of crops and livestock, which depend strongly on
climate and hence on latitude. But similar reasoning also applies to the
diffusion of technological innovations, insofar as they are best suited with
out modification to specific environments. Diffusion was slower in Africa
and especially in the Americas, because of those continents' north-south
major axes and geographic and ecological barriers. It was also difficult in
traditional New Guinea, where rugged terrain and the long backbone of
high mountains prevented any significant progress toward political and
linguistic unification.
Related to these factors affecting diffusion within continents is a third
set of factors influencing diffusion between continents, which may also
help build up a local pool of domesticates and technology. Ease of inter
continental diffusion has varied, because some continents are more iso
lated than others. Within the last 6,000 years it has been easiest from
Eurasia to sub-Saharan Africa, supplying most of Africa's species of live
stock. But interhemispheric diffusion made no contribution to Native
America's complex societies, isolated from Eurasia at low latitudes by
broad oceans, and at high latitudes by geography and by a climate suitable
just for hunting-gathering. To Aboriginal Australia, isolated from Eurasia
by the water barriers of the Indonesian Archipelago, Eurasia's sole proven
contribution was the dingo.
The fourth and last set of factors consists of continental differences in
area or total population size. A larger area or population means more
potential inventors, more competing societies, more innovations available
to adopt—and more pressure to adopt and retain innovations, because
societies failing to do so will tend to be eliminated by competing societies.
That fate befell African pygmies and many other hunter-gatherer popula
tions displaced by farmers. Conversely, it also befell the stubborn, conser
vative Greenland Norse farmers, replaced by Eskimo hunter-gatherers
whose subsistence methods and technology were far superior to those of