408 • EPILOGUE
the Norse under Greenland conditions. Among the world's landmasses,
area and the number of competing societies were largest for Eurasia, much
smaller for Australia and New Guinea and especially for Tasmania. The
Americas, despite their large aggregate area, were fragmented by geogra
phy and ecology and functioned effectively as several poorly connected
smaller continents.
Those four sets of factors constitute big environmental differences that
can be quantified objectively and that are not subject to dispute. While one
can contest my subjective impression that New Guineans are on the aver
age smarter than Eurasians, one cannot deny that New Guinea has a much
smaller area and far fewer big animal species than Eurasia. But mention
of these environmental differences invites among historians the label "geo
graphic determinism," which raises hackles. The label seems to have
unpleasant connotations, such as that human creativity counts for noth
ing, or that we humans are passive robots helplessly programmed by cli
mate, fauna, and flora. Of course these fears are misplaced. Without
human inventiveness, all of us today would still be cutting our meat with
stone tools and eating it raw, like our ancestors of a million years ago. All
human societies contain inventive people. It's just that some environments
provide more starting materials, and more favorable conditions for utiliz
ing inventions, than do other environments.
THESE ANSWERS TO Yali's question are longer and more complicated
than Yali himself would have wanted. Historians, however, may find them
too brief and oversimplified. Compressing 13,000 years of history on all
continents into a 400-page book works out to an average of about one
page per continent per 150 years, making brevity and simplification inevi
table. Yet the compression brings a compensating benefit: long-term com
parisons of regions yield insights that cannot be won from short-term
studies of single societies.
Naturally, a host of issues raised by Yali's question remain unresolved.
At present, we can put forward some partial answers plus a research
agenda for the future, rather than a fully developed theory. The challenge
now is to develop human history as a science, on a par with acknowledged
historical sciences such as astronomy, geology, and evolutionary biology.
Hence it seems appropriate to conclude this book by looking to the future
of the discipline of history, and by outlining some of the unresolved issues.