LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK » 205
ing about 10,000 years ago and then accelerated with the rise of cities
starting several thousand years ago. In fact, the first attested dates for
many familiar infectious diseases are surprisingly recent: around 1600 B.c.
for smallpox (as deduced from pockmarks on an Egyptian mummy), 400
B.C. for mumps, 200 B.C. for leprosy, A.D. 1840 for epidemic polio, and
1959 for AIDS.
WHY DID THE rise of agriculture launch the evolution of our crowd
infectious diseases? One reason just mentioned is that agriculture sustains
much higher human population densities than does the hunting-gathering
lifestyle—on the average, 10 to 100 times higher. In addition, hunter-gath
erers frequently shift camp and leave behind their own piles of feces with
accumulated microbes and worm larvae. But farmers are sedentary and
live amid their own sewage, thus providing microbes with a short path
from one person's body into another's drinking water.
Some farming populations make it even easier for their own fecal bacte
ria and worms to infect new victims, by gathering their feces and urine
and spreading them as fertilizer on the fields where people work. Irrigation
agriculture and fish farming provide ideal living conditions for the snails
carrying schistosomiasis and for flukes that burrow through our skin as
we wade through the feces-laden water. Sedentary farmers become sur
rounded not only by their feces but also by disease transmitting rodents,
attracted by the farmers' stored food. The forest clearings made by African
farmers also provide ideal breeding habitats for malaria-transmitting mos
quitoes.
If the rise of farming was thus a bonanza for our microbes, the rise of
cities was a greater one, as still more densely packed human populations
festered under even worse sanitation conditions. Not until the beginning
of the 20th century did Europe's urban populations finally become self-
sustaining: before then, constant immigration of healthy peasants from the
countryside was necessary to make up for the constant deaths of city
dwellers from crowd diseases. Another bonanza was the development of
world trade routes, which by Roman times effectively joined the popula
tions of Europe, Asia, and North Africa into one giant breeding ground
for microbes. That's when smallpox finally reached Rome, as the Plague
of Antoninus, which killed millions of Roman citizens between A.D. 165
and 180.