HOW AFRICA BECAME BLACK • 3 89
hint why speakers of Niger-Congo languages, stemming from north of the
equator, were able to displace Africa's equatorial Pygmies and subequato
rial Khoisan people. The failure of the Khoisan and Pygmies to develop
agriculture was due not to any inadequacy of theirs as farmers but merely
to the accident that southern Africa's wild plants were mostly unsuitable
for domestication. Neither Bantu nor white farmers, heirs to thousands of
years of farming experience, were subsequently able to develop southern
African native plants into food crops.
Africa's domesticated animal species can be summarized much more
quickly than its plants, because there are so few of them. The sole animal
that we know for sure was domesticated in Africa, because its wild ances
tor is confined there, is a turkeylike bird called the guinea fowl. Wild
ancestors of domestic cattle, donkeys, pigs, dogs, and house cats were
native to North Africa but also to Southwest Asia, so we can't yet be cer
tain where they were first domesticated, although the earliest dates cur
rently known for domestic donkeys and house cats favor Egypt. Recent
evidence suggests that cattle may have been domesticated independently in
North Africa, Southwest Asia, and India, and that all three of those stocks
have contributed to modern African cattle breeds. Otherwise, all the
remainder of Africa's domestic mammals must have been domesticated
elsewhere and introduced as domesticates to Africa, because their wild
ancestors occur only in Eurasia. Africa's sheep and goats were domesti
cated in Southwest Asia, its chickens in Southeast Asia, its horses in south
ern Russia, and its camels probably in Arabia.
The most unexpected feature of this list of African domestic animals is
again a negative one. The list includes not a single one of the big wild
mammal species for which Africa is famous and which it possesses in such
abundance—its zebras and wildebeests, its rhinos and hippos, its giraffes
and buffalo. As we'll see, that reality was as fraught with consequences for
African history as was the absence of native domestic plants in subequato
rial Africa.
This quick tour through Africa's food staples suffices to show that some
of them traveled a long way from their points of origin, both inside and
outside Africa. In Africa as elsewhere in the world, some peoples were
much "luckier" than others, in the suites of domesticable wild plant and
animal species that they inherited from their environment. By analogy with
the engulfing of Aboriginal Australian hunter-gatherers by British colo-