1 12 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
that food production, while increasing the quantity of edible calories per
acre, left the food producers less well nourished than the hunter-gatherers
whom they succeeded. That paradox developed because human popula
tion densities rose slightly more steeply than did the availability of food.
Taken together, these four factors help us understand why the transition
to food production in the Fertile Crescent began around 8500 B.C., not
around 18,500 or 28,500 B.C. At the latter two dates hunting-gathering
was still much more rewarding than incipient food production, because
wild mammals were still abundant; wild cereals were not yet abundant;
people had not yet developed the inventions necessary for collecting, pro
cessing, and storing cereals efficiently; and human population densities
were not yet high enough for a large premium to be placed on extracting
more calories per acre.
A final factor in the transition became decisive at geographic boundaries
between hunter-gatherers and food producers. The much denser popula
tions of food producers enabled them to displace or kill hunter-gatherers
by their sheer numbers, not to mention the other advantages associated
with food production (including technology, germs, and professional sol
diers). In areas where there were only hunter-gatherers to begin with, those
groups of hunter-gatherers who adopted food production outbred those
who didn't.
As a result, in most areas of the globe suitable for food production,
hunter-gatherers met one of two fates: either they were displaced by neigh
boring food producers, or else they survived only by adopting food pro
duction themselves. In places where they were already numerous or where
geography retarded immigration by food producers, local hunter-gatherers
did have time to adopt farming in prehistoric times and thus to survive as
farmers. This may have happened in the U.S. Southwest, in the western
Mediterranean, on the Atlantic coast of Europe, and in parts of Japan.
However, in Indonesia, tropical Southeast Asia, most of subequatorial
Africa, and probably in parts of Europe, the hunter-gatherers were
replaced by farmers in the prehistoric era, whereas a similar replacement
took place in modern times in Australia and much of the western United
States.
Only where especially potent geographic or ecological barriers made
immigration of food producers or diffusion of locally appropriate food-
producing techniques very difficult were hunter-gatherers able to persist
until modern times in areas suitable for food production. The three out-