98 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
same crop or domestic animal in different areas. For instance, India's zebu
breeds of domestic cattle possess humps lacking in western Eurasian cattle
breeds, and genetic analyses show that the ancestors of modern Indian
and western Eurasian cattle breeds diverged from each other hundreds of
thousands of years ago, long before any animals were domesticated any
where. That is, cattle were domesticated independently in India and west
ern Eurasia, within the last 10,000 years, starting with wild Indian and
western Eurasian cattle subspecies that had diverged hundreds of thou
sands of years earlier.
LET'S NOW RETURN to our earlier questions about the rise of food pro
duction. Where, when, and how did food production develop in different
parts of the globe?
At one extreme are areas in which food production arose altogether
independently, with the domestication of many indigenous crops (and, in
some cases, animals) before the arrival of any crops or animals from other
areas. There are only five such areas for which the evidence is at present
detailed and compelling: Southwest Asia, also known as the Near East
or Fertile Crescent; China; Mesoamerica (the term applied to central and
southern Mexico and adjacent areas of Central America); the Andes of
South America, and possibly the adjacent Amazon Basin as well; and the
eastern United States (Figure 5.1). Some or all of these centers may actually
comprise several nearby centers where food production arose more or less
independently, such as North China's Yellow River valley and South Chi
na's Yangtze River valley.
In addition to these five areas where food production definitely arose
de novo, four others—Africa's Sahel zone, tropical West Africa, Ethiopia,
and New Guinea—are candidates for that distinction. However, there is
some uncertainty in each case. Although indigenous wild plants were
undoubtedly domesticated in Africa's Sahel zone just south of the Sahara,
cattle herding may have preceded agriculture there, and it is not yet certain
whether those were independently domesticated Sahel cattle or, instead,
domestic cattle of Fertile Crescent origin whose arrival triggered local
plant domestication. It remains similarly uncertain whether the arrival of
those Sahel crops then triggered the undoubted local domestication of
indigenous wild plants in tropical West Africa, and whether the arrival of
Southwest Asian crops is what triggered the local domestication of indige-