FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 289
lead to societies on the next level of complexity if conditions permit. Tribes
conquer or combine with tribes to reach the size of chiefdoms, which con
quer or combine with other chiefdoms to reach the size of states, which
conquer or combine with other states to become empires. More generally,
large units potentially enjoy an advantage over individual small units if—
and that's a big "if"—the large units can solve the problems that come
with their larger size, such as perennial threats from upstart claimants to
leadership, commoner resentment of kleptocracy, and increased problems
associated with economic integration.
The amalgamation of smaller units into larger ones has often been doc
umented historically or archaeologically. Contrary to Rousseau, such
amalgamations never occur by a process of unthreatened little societies
freely deciding to merge, in order to promote the happiness of their citi
zens. Leaders of little societies, as of big ones, are jealous of their indepen
dence and prerogatives. Amalgamation occurs instead in either of two
ways: by merger under the threat of external force, or by actual conquest.
Innumerable examples are available to illustrate each mode of amalgam
ation.
Merger under the threat of external force is well illustrated by the for
mation of the Cherokee Indian confederation in the U.S. Southeast. The
Cherokees were originally divided into 30 or 40 independent chiefdoms,
each consisting of a village of about 400 people. Increasing white settle
ment led to conflicts between Cherokees and whites. When individual
Cherokees robbed or assaulted white settlers and traders, the whites were
unable to discriminate among the different Cherokee chiefdoms and retali
ated indiscriminately against any Cherokees, either by military action or
by cutting off trade. In response, the Cherokee chiefdoms gradually found
themselves compelled to join into a single confederacy in the course of the
18th century. Initially, the larger chiefdoms in 1730 chose an overall
leader, a chief named Moytoy, who was succeeded in 1741 by his son. The
first task of these leaders was to punish individual Cherokees who attacked
whites, and to deal with the white government. Around 1758 the Chero
kees regularized their decision making with an annual council modeled on
previous village councils and meeting at one village (Echota), which
thereby became a de facto "capital." Eventually, the Cherokees became
literate (as we saw in Chapter 12) and adopted a written constitution.
The Cherokee confederacy was thus formed not by conquest but by the
amalgamation of previously jealous smaller entities, which merged only