8 8 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
able calories means more people. Among wild plant and animal species,
only a small minority are edible to humans or worth hunting or gathering.
Most species are useless to us as food, for one or more of the following
reasons: they are indigestible (like bark), poisonous (monarch butterflies
and death-cap mushrooms), low in nutritional value (jellyfish), tedious to
prepare (very small nuts), difficult to gather (larvae of most insects), or
dangerous to hunt (rhinoceroses). Most biomass (living biological matter)
on land is in the form of wood and leaves, most of which we cannot digest.
By selecting and growing those few species of plants and animals that
we can eat, so that they constitute 90 percent rather than 0.1 percent of
the biomass on an acre of land, we obtain far more edible calories per
acre. As a result, one acre can feed many more herders and farmers—
typically, 10 to 100 times more—than hunter-gatherers. That strength of
brute numbers was the first of many military advantages that food-produc
ing tribes gained over hunter-gatherer tribes.
In human societies possessing domestic animals, livestock fed more peo
ple in four distinct ways: by furnishing meat, milk, and fertilizer and by
pulling plows. First and most directly, domestic animals became the socie
ties' major source of animal protein, replacing wild game. Today, for
instance, Americans tend to get most of their animal protein from cows,
pigs, sheep, and chickens, with game such as venison just a rare delicacy.
In addition, some big domestic mammals served as sources of milk and of
milk products such as butter, cheese, and yogurt. Milked mammals include
the cow, sheep, goat, horse, reindeer, water buffalo, yak, and Arabian and
Bactrian camels. Those mammals thereby yield several times more calories
over their lifetime than if they were just slaughtered and consumed as
meat.
Big domestic mammals also interacted with domestic plants in two
ways to increase crop production. First, as any modern gardener or farmer
still knows by experience, crop yields can be greatly increased by manure
applied as fertilizer. Even with the modern availability of synthetic fertiliz
ers produced by chemical factories, the major source of crop fertilizer
today in most societies is still animal manure—especially of cows, but also
of yaks and sheep. Manure has been valuable, too, as a source of fuel for
fires in traditional societies.
In addition, the largest domestic mammals interacted with domestic
plants to increase food production by pulling plows and thereby making
it possible for people to till land that had previously been uneconomical
for farming. Those plow animals were the cow, horse, water buffalo, Bali