COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA • 77
qui, the best general of the Inca emperor Manco, who succeeded
Atahuallpa, besieged the Spaniards in Lima in 1536 and tried to storm the
city, two squadrons of Spanish cavalry charged a much larger Indian force
on flat ground, killed Quizo and all of his commanders in the first charge,
and routed his army. A similar cavalry charge of 26 horsemen routed the
best troops of Emperor Manco himself, as he was besieging the Spaniards
in Cuzco.
The transformation of warfare by horses began with their domestica
tion around 4000 B.C., in the steppes north of the Black Sea. Horses per
mitted people possessing them to cover far greater distances than was
possible on foot, to attack by surprise, and to flee before a superior
defending force could be gathered. Their role at Cajamarca thus exempli
fies a military weapon that remained potent for 6,000 years, until the early
20th century, and that was eventually applied on all the continents. Not
until the First World War did the military dominance of cavalry finally
end. When we consider the advantages that Spaniards derived from horses,
steel weapons, and armor against foot soldiers without metal, it should no
longer surprise us that Spaniards consistently won battles against enor
mous odds.
How did Atahuallpa come to be at Cajamarca? Atahuallpa and his
army came to be at Cajamarca because they had just won decisive battles
in a civil war that left the Incas divided and vulnerable. Pizarro quickly
appreciated those divisions and exploited them. The reason for the civil
war was that an epidemic of smallpox, spreading overland among South
American Indians after its arrival with Spanish settlers in Panama and
Colombia, had killed the Inca emperor Huayna Capac and most of his
court around 1526, and then immediately killed his designated heir, Ninan
Cuyuchi. Those deaths precipitated a contest for the throne between Ata
huallpa and his half brother Huascar. If it had not been for the epidemic,
the Spaniards would have faced a united empire.
Atahuallpa's presence at Cajamarca thus highlights one of the key fac
tors in world history: diseases transmitted to peoples lacking immunity by
invading peoples with considerable immunity. Smallpox, measles, influ
enza, typhus, bubonic plague, and other infectious diseases endemic in
Europe played a decisive role in European conquests, by decimating many
peoples on other continents. For example, a smallpox epidemic devastated
the Aztecs after the failure of the first Spanish attack in 1520 and killed
Cuitlahuac, the Aztec emperor who briefly succeeded Montezuma.