4 4 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
lia. They became extinct in every habitat without exception, from deserts
to cold rain forest and tropical rain forest. Hence it seems to me most
likely that the giants were indeed exterminated by humans, both directly
(by being killed for food) and indirectly (as the result of fires and habitat
modification caused by humans). But regardless of whether the overkill
hypothesis or the climate hypothesis proves correct, the disappearance of
all of the big animals of Australia / New Guinea had, as we shall see, heavy
consequences for subsequent human history. Those extinctions eliminated
all the large wild animals that might otherwise have been candidates for
domestication, and left native Australians and New Guineans with not a
single native domestic animal.
THUS, THE COLONIZATION of Australia/New Guinea was not
achieved until around the time of the Great Leap Forward. Another exten
sion of human range that soon followed was the one into the coldest parts
of Eurasia. While Neanderthals lived in glacial times and were adapted to
the cold, they penetrated no farther north than northern Germany and
Kiev. That's not surprising, since Neanderthals apparently lacked needles,
sewn clothing, warm houses, and other technology essential to survival in
the coldest climates. Anatomically modern peoples who did possess such
technology had expanded into Siberia by around 20,000 years ago (there
are the usual much older disputed claims). That expansion may have been
responsible for the extinction of Eurasia's woolly mammoth and woolly
rhinoceros.
With the settlement of Australia / New Guinea, humans now occupied
three of the five habitable continents. (Throughout this book, I count
Eurasia as a single continent, and I omit Antarctica because it was not
reached by humans until the 19th century and has never had any self-
supporting human population.) That left only two continents, North
America and South America. They were surely the last ones settled, for the
obvious reason that reaching the Americas from the Old World required
either boats (for which there is no evidence even in Indonesia until 40,000
years ago and none in Europe until much later) in order to cross by sea, or
else it required the occupation of Siberia (unoccupied until about 20,000
years ago) in order to cross the Bering land bridge.
However, it is uncertain when, between about 14,000 and 35,000 years