260 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
and heavier than paper. The metallurgical skills, inks, and presses of 1700
B.c. Crete were more primitive than those of A.D. 1455 Germany, so the
disk had to be punched by hand rather than by cast movable type locked
into a metal frame, inked, and pressed. The disk's script was a syllabary
with more signs, of more complex form, than the Roman alphabet used by
Gutenberg. As a result, the Phaistos disk's printing technology was much
clumsier, and offered fewer advantages over writing by hand, than Guten
berg's printing press. In addition to all those technological drawbacks, the
Phaistos disk was printed at a time when knowledge of writing was con
fined to a few palace or temple scribes. Hence there was little demand for
the disk maker's beautiful product, and little incentive to invest in making
the dozens of hand punches required. In contrast, the potential mass mar
ket for printing in medieval Europe induced numerous investors to lend
money to Gutenberg.
HUMAN TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPED from the first stone tools, in use
by two and a half million years ago, to the 1996 laser printer that replaced
my already outdated 1992 laser printer and that was used to print this
book's manuscript. The rate of development was undetectably slow at the
beginning, when hundreds of thousands of years passed with no discern
ible change in our stone tools and with no surviving evidence for artifacts
made of other materials. Today, technology advances so rapidly that it is
reported in the daily newspaper.
In this long history of accelerating development, one can single out two
especially significant jumps. The first, occurring between 100,000 and
50,000 years ago, probably was made possible by genetic changes in our
bodies: namely, by evolution of the modern anatomy permitting modern
speech or modern brain function, or both. That jump led to bone tools,
single-purpose stone tools, and compound tools. The second jump resulted
from our adoption of a sedentary lifestyle, which happened at different
times in different parts of the world, as early as 13,000 years ago in some
areas and not even today in others. For the most part, that adoption was
linked to our adoption of food production, which required us to remain
close to our crops, orchards, and stored food surpluses.
Sedentary living was decisive for the history of technology, because it
enabled people to accumulate nonportable possessions. Nomadic hunter-