152. • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
But all such claims are based on pure speculation. There has never been
a study of many societies under similar socioeconomic conditions on each
of two continents, demonstrating systematic ideological differences
between the two continents' peoples. The usual reasoning is instead circu
lar: because technological differences exist, the existence of corresponding
ideological differences is inferred.
In reality, I regularly observe in New Guinea that native societies there
differ greatly from each other in their prevalent outlooks. Just like indus
trialized Europe and America, traditional New Guinea has conservative
societies that resist new ways, living side by side with innovative societies
that selectively adopt new ways. The result, with the arrival of Western
technology, is that the more entrepreneurial societies are now exploiting
Western technology to overwhelm their conservative neighbors.
For example, when Europeans first reached the highlands of eastern
New Guinea, in the 1930s, they "discovered" dozens of previously uncon¬
tacted Stone Age tribes, of which the Chimbu tribe proved especially
aggressive in adopting Western technology. When Chimbus saw white set
tlers planting coffee, they began growing coffee themselves as a cash crop.
In 1964 I met a 50-year-old Chimbu man, unable to read, wearing a tradi
tional grass skirt, and born into a society still using stone tools, who had
become rich by growing coffee, used his profits to buy a sawmill for
$100,000 cash, and bought a fleet of trucks to transport his coffee and
timber to market. In contrast, a neighboring highland people with whom
I worked for eight years, the Daribi, are especially conservative and unin
terested in new technology. When the first helicopter landed in the Daribi
area, they briefly looked at it and just went back to what they had been
doing; the Chimbus would have been bargaining to charter it. As a result,
Chimbus are now moving into the Daribi area, taking it over for planta
tions, and reducing the Daribi to working for them.
On every other continent as well, certain native societies have proved
very receptive, adopted foreign ways and technology selectively, and inte
grated them successfully into their own society. In Nigeria the Ibo people
became the local entrepreneurial equivalent of New Guinea's Chimbus.
Today the most numerous Native American tribe in the United States is
the Navajo, who on European arrival were just one of several hundred
tribes. But the Navajo proved especially resilient and able to deal selec
tively with innovation. They incorporated Western dyes into their weav-