1 64 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
acquiring crops, Khoisan peoples who acquired cows and sheep around
2,000 years ago displaced Khoisan hunter-gatherers over much of south
ern Africa. The arrival of the domestic horse in West Africa transformed
warfare there and turned the area into a set of kingdoms dependent on
cavalry. The only factor that prevented horses from spreading beyond
West Africa was trypanosome diseases borne by tsetse flies.
The same pattern repeated itself elsewhere in the world, whenever peo
ples lacking native wild mammal species suitable for domestication finally
had the opportunity to acquire Eurasian domestic animals. European
horses were eagerly adopted by Native Americans in both North and
South America, within a generation of the escape of horses from European
settlements. For example, by the 19th century North America's Great
Plains Indians were famous as expert horse-mounted warriors and bison
hunters, but they did not even obtain horses until the late 17th century.
Sheep acquired from Spaniards similarly transformed Navajo Indian soci
ety and led to, among other things, the weaving of the beautiful woolen
blankets for which the Navajo have become renowned. Within a decade
of Tasmania's settlement by Europeans with dogs, Aboriginal Tasmanians,
who had never before seen dogs, began to breed them in large numbers for
use in hunting. Thus, among the thousands of culturally diverse native
peoples of Australia, the Americas, and Africa, no universal cultural taboo
stood in the way of animal domestication.
Surely, if some local wild mammal species of those continents had been
domesticable, some Australian, American, and African peoples would
have domesticated them and gained great advantage from them, just as
they benefited from the Eurasian domestic animals that they immediately
adopted when those became available. For instance, consider all the peo
ples of sub-Saharan Africa living within the range of wild zebras and buf
falo. Why wasn't there at least one African hunter-gatherer tribe that
domesticated those zebras and buffalo and that thereby gained sway over
other Africans, without having to await the arrival of Eurasian horses and
cattle? All these facts indicate that the explanation for the lack of native
mammal domestication outside Eurasia lay with the locally available wild
mammals themselves, not with the local peoples.
A SECOND TYPE of evidence for the same interpretation comes from
pets. Keeping wild animals as pets, and taming them, constitute an initial