FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 2 75
hierarchically ranked lineages, each concentrating its marriages within its
own lineage. Furthermore, since chiefs required menial servants as well as
specialized craftspeople, chiefdoms differed from tribes in having many
jobs that could be filled by slaves, typically obtained by capture in raids.
The most distinctive economic feature of chiefdoms was their shift from
reliance solely on the reciprocal exchanges characteristic of bands and
tribes, by which A gives B a gift while expecting that B at some unspecified
future time will give a gift of comparable value to A. We modern state
dwellers indulge in such behavior on birthdays and holidays, but most of
our flow of goods is achieved instead by buying and selling for money
according to the law of supply and demand. While continuing reciprocal
exchanges and without marketing or money, chiefdoms developed an addi
tional new system termed a redistributive economy. A simple example
would involve a chief receiving wheat at harvest time from every farmer
in the chiefdom, then throwing a feast for everybody and serving bread or
else storing the wheat and gradually giving it out again in the months
between harvests. When a large portion of the goods received from com
moners was not redistributed to them but was retained and consumed by
the chiefly lineages and craftspeople, the redistribution became tribute, a
precursor of taxes that made its first appearance in chiefdoms. From the
commoners the chiefs claimed not only goods but also labor for construc
tion of public works, which again might return to benefit the commoners
(for example, irrigation systems to help feed everybody) or instead bene
fited mainly the chiefs (for instance, lavish tombs).
We have been talking about chiefdoms generically, as if they were all
the same. In fact, chiefdoms varied considerably. Larger ones tended to
have more powerful chiefs, more ranks of chiefly lineages, greater distinc
tions between chiefs and commoners, more retention of tribute by the
chiefs, more layers of bureaucrats, and grander public architecture. For
instance, societies on small Polynesian islands were effectively rather simi
lar to tribal societies with a big-man, except that the position of chief was
hereditary. The chief's hut looked like any other hut, there were no bureau
crats or public works, the chief redistributed most goods he received back
to the commoners, and land was controlled by the community. But on the
largest Polynesian islands, such as Hawaii, Tahiti, and Tonga, chiefs were
recognizable at a glance by their ornaments, public works were erected by
large labor forces, most tribute was retained by the chiefs, and all land
was controlled by them. A further gradation among societies with ranked