2 48 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
pared with existing technology. While wheels are very useful in modern
industrial societies, that has not been so in some other societies. Ancient
Native Mexicans invented wheeled vehicles with axles for use as toys, but
not for transport. That seems incredible to us, until we reflect that ancient
Mexicans lacked domestic animals to hitch to their wheeled vehicles,
which therefore offered no advantage over human porters.
A second consideration is social value and prestige, which can override
economic benefit (or lack thereof). Millions of people today buy designer
jeans for double the price of equally durable generic jeans—because the
social cachet of the designer label counts for more than the extra cost.
Similarly, Japan continues to use its horrendously cumbersome kanji writ
ing system in preference to efficient alphabets or Japan's own efficient kana
syllabary—because the prestige attached to kanji is so great.
Still another factor is compatibility with vested interests. This book, like
probably every other typed document you have ever read, was typed with
a QWERTY keyboard, named for the left-most six letters in its upper row.
Unbelievable as it may now sound, that keyboard layout was designed in
1873 as a feat of anti-engineering. It employs a whole series of perverse
tricks designed to force typists to type as slowly as possible, such as scatter
ing the commonest letters over all keyboard rows and concentrating them
on the left side (where right-handed people have to use their weaker hand).
The reason behind all of those seemingly counterproductive features is that
the typewriters of 1873 jammed if adjacent keys were struck in quick suc
cession, so that manufacturers had to slow down typists. When improve
ments in typewriters eliminated the problem of jamming, trials in 1932
with an efficiently laid-out keyboard showed that it would let us double
our typing speed and reduce our typing effort by 95 percent. But
QWERTY keyboards were solidly entrenched by then. The vested interests
of hundreds of millions of QWERTY typists, typing teachers, typewriter
and computer salespeople, and manufacturers have crushed all moves
toward keyboard efficiency for over 60-years.
While the story of the QWERTY keyboard may sound funny, many
similar cases have involved much heavier economic consequences. Why
does Japan now dominate the world market for transistorized electronic
consumer products, to a degree that damages the United States's balance
of payments with Japan, even though transistors were invented and pat
ented in the United States? Because Sony bought transistor licensing rights
from Western Electric at a time when the American electronics consumer