SPACIOUS SKIES AND TILTED AXES • 1 79
about by alternative new mutations or alternative courses of selection to
yield equivalent results. In this light, one can examine a crop widespread
in prehistoric times and ask whether all of its varieties show the same wild
mutation or same transforming mutation. The purpose of this examina
tion is to try to figure out whether the crop was developed in just one area
or else independently in several areas.
If one carries out such a genetic analysis for major ancient New World
crops, many of them prove to include two or more of those alternative
wild variants, or two or more of those alternative transforming mutations.
This suggests that the crop was domesticated independently in at least two
different areas, and that some varieties of the crop inherited the particular
mutation of one area while other varieties of the same crop inherited the
mutation of another area. On this basis, botanists conclude that lima
beans (Phaseolus lunatus), common beans (Phaseolus vulgaris), and chili
peppers of the Capsicum annuutn I chinense group were all domesticated
on at least two separate occasions, once in Mesoamerica and once in South
America; and that the squash Cucurbita pepo and the seed plant goosefoot
were also domesticated independently at least twice, once in Mesoamerica
and once in the eastern United States. In contrast, most ancient Southwest
Asian crops exhibit just one of the alternative wild variants or alternative
transforming mutations, suggesting that all modern varieties of that partic
ular crop stem from only a single domestication.
What does it imply if the same crop has been repeatedly and indepen
dently domesticated in several different parts of its wild range, and not
just once and in a single area? We have already seen that plant domestica
tion involves the modification of wild plants so that they become more
useful to humans by virtue of larger seeds, a less bitter taste, or other
qualities. Hence if a productive crop is already available, incipient farmers
will surely proceed to grow it rather than start all over again by gathering
its not yet so useful wild relative and redomesticating it. Evidence for just
a single domestication thus suggests that, once a wild plant had been
domesticated, the crop spread quickly to other areas throughout the wild
plant's range, preempting the need for other independent domestications
of the same plant. However, when we find evidence that the same wild
ancestor was domesticated independently in different areas, we infer that
the crop spread too slowly to preempt its domestication elsewhere. The
evidence for predominantly single domestications in Southwest Asia, but
frequent multiple domestications in the Americas, might thus provide