130 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
protective nets and greenhouses were we finally able to defeat the thrushes,
and to redesign strawberries and raspberries according to our own stan
dards.
WE 'VE THUS SEEN that the difference between gigantic supermarket
strawberries and tiny wild ones is just one example of the various features
distinguishing cultivated plants from their wild ancestors. Those differ
ences arose initially from natural variation among the wild plants them
selves. Some of it, such as the variation in berry size or in nut bitterness,
would have been readily noticed by ancient farmers. Other variation, such
as that in seed dispersal mechanisms or seed dormancy, would have gone
unrecognized by humans before the rise of modern botany. But whether
or not the selection of wild edible plants by ancient hikers relied on con
scious or unconscious criteria, the resulting evolution of wild plants into
crops was at first an unconscious process. It followed inevitably from our
selecting among wild plant individuals, and from competition among plant
individuals in gardens favoring individuals different from those favored in
the wild.
That's why Darwin, in his great book On the Origin of Species, didn't
start with an account of natural selection. His first chapter is instead a
lengthy account of how our domesticated plants and animals arose
through artificial selection by humans. Rather than discussing the Galapa
gos Island birds that we usually associate with him, Darwin began by dis
cussing—how farmers develop varieties of gooseberries! He wrote, "I have
seen great surprise expressed in horticultural works at the wonderful skill
of gardeners, in having produced such splendid results from such poor
materials; but the art has been simple, and as far as the final result is con
cerned, has been followed almost unconsciously. It has consisted in always
cultivating the best-known variety, sowing its seeds, and, when a slightly
better variety chanced to appear, selecting it, and so onwards." Those
principles of crop development by artificial selection still serve as our most
understandable model of the origin of species by natural selection.