BLUEPRINTS AND BORROWED LETTERS • 2 17
today by most peoples is the alphabet, which ideally would provide a
unique sign (termed a letter) for each basic sound of the language (a pho
neme). Actually, most alphabets consist of only about 20 or 30 letters, and
most languages have more phonemes than their alphabets have letters. For
example, English transcribes about 40 phonemes with a mere 26 letters.
Hence most alphabetically written languages, including English, are forced
to assign several different phonemes to the same letter and to represent
some phonemes by combinations of letters, such as the English two-letter
combinations sh and tb (each represented by a single letter in the Russian
and Greek alphabets, respectively).
The second strategy uses so-called logograms, meaning that one written
sign stands for a whole word. That's the function of many signs of Chinese
writing and of the predominant Japanese writing system (termed kanji).
Before the spread of alphabetic writing, systems making much use of logo
grams were more common and included Egyptian hieroglyphs, Maya
glyphs, and Sumerian cuneiform.
The third strategy, least familiar to most readers of this book, uses a
sign for each syllable. In practice, most such writing systems (termed sylla
baries) provide distinct signs just for syllables of one consonant followed
by one vowel (like the syllables of the word "fa-mi-ly"), and resort to
various tricks in order to write other types of syllables by means of those
signs. Syllabaries were common in ancient times, as exemplified by the
Linear B writing of Mycenaean Greece. Some syllabaries persist today, the
most important being the kana syllabary that the Japanese use for tele
grams, bank statements, and texts for blind readers.
I've intentionally termed these three approaches strategies rather than
writing systems. No actual writing system employs one strategy exclu
sively. Chinese writing is not purely logographic, nor is English writing
purely alphabetic. Like all alphabetic writing systems, English uses many
logograms, such as numerals, $, %, and + : that is, arbitrary signs, not
made up of phonetic elements, representing whole words. "Syllabic" Lin
ear B had many logograms, and "logographic" Egyptian hieroglyphs
included many syllabic signs as well as a virtual alphabet of individual
letters for each consonant.
INVENTING A WRITING system from scratch must have been incompa
rably more difficult than borrowing and adapting one. The first scribes