2 24 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
3000 B.C. were reinvented, halfway around the world, by early Mesoamer
ican Indians before 600 B.c.
W I TH THE POSSIBLE exceptions of the Egyptian, Chinese, and Easter
Island writing to be considered later, all other writing systems devised any
where in the world, at any time, appear to have been descendants of sys
tems modified from or at least inspired by Sumerian or early
Mesoamerican writing. One reason why there were so few independent
origins of writing is the great difficulty of inventing it, as we have already
discussed. The other reason is that other opportunities for the independent
invention of writing were preempted by Sumerian or early Mesoamerican
writing and their derivatives.
We know that the development of Sumerian writing took at least hun
dreds, possibly thousands, of years. As we shall see, the prerequisites for
those developments consisted of several features of human society that
determined whether a society would find writing useful, and whether the
society could support the necessary specialist scribes. Many other human
societies besides those of the Sumerians and early Mexicans—such as those
of ancient India, Crete, and Ethiopia—evolved these prerequisites. How
ever, the Sumerians and early Mexicans happened to have been the first to
evolve them in the Old World and the New World, respectively. Once the
Sumerians and early Mexicans had invented writing, the details or princi
ples of their writing spread rapidly to other societies, before they could go
through the necessary centuries or millennia of independent experimenta
tion with writing themselves. Thus, that potential for other, independent
experiments was preempted or aborted.
The spread of writing has occurred by either of two contrasting meth
ods, which find parallels throughout the history of technology and ideas.
Someone invents something and puts it to use. How do you, another
would-be user, then design something similar for your own use, knowing
that other people have already got their own model built and working?
Such transmission of inventions assumes a whole spectrum of forms. At
the one end lies "blueprint copying," when you copy or modify an avail
able detailed blueprint. At the opposite end lies "idea diffusion," when
you receive little more than the basic idea and have to reinvent the details.
Knowing that it can be done stimulates you to try to do it yourself, but