COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA • 73
to his lodging. The Indians carrying the litter, and those escorting Ata¬
huallpa, never abandoned him: all died around him.
"The panic-stricken Indians remaining in the square, terrified at the fir
ing of the guns and at the horses—something they had never seen—tried
to flee from the square by knocking down a stretch of wall and running
out onto the plain outside. Our cavalry jumped the broken wall and
charged into the plain, shouting, 'Chase those with the fancy clothes!
Don't let any escape! Spear them!' All of the other Indian soldiers whom
Atahuallpa had brought were a mile from Cajamarca ready for battle, but
not one made a move, and during all this not one Indian raised a weapon
against a Spaniard. When the squadrons of Indians who had remained in
the plain outside the town saw the other Indians fleeing and shouting, most
of them too panicked and fled. It was an astonishing sight, for the whole
valley for 15 or 20 miles was completely filled with Indians. Night had
already fallen, and our cavalry were continuing to spear Indians in the
fields, when we heard a trumpet calling for us to reassemble at camp.
"If night had not come on, few out of the more than 40,000 Indian
troops would have been left alive. Six or seven thousand Indians lay dead,
and many more had their arms cut off and other wounds. Atahuallpa him
self admitted that we had killed 7,000 of his men in that battle. The man
killed in one of the litters was his minister, the lord of Chincha, of whom
he was very fond. All those Indians who bore Atahuallpa's litter appeared
to be high chiefs and councillors. They were all killed, as well as those
Indians who were carried in the other litters and hammocks. The lord of
Cajamarca was also killed, and others, but their numbers were so great
that they could not be counted, for all who came in attendance on Ata
huallpa were great lords. It was extraordinary to see so powerful a ruler
captured in so short a time, when he had come with such a mighty army.
Truly, it was not accomplished by our own forces, for there were so few
of us. It was by the grace of God, which is great.
"Atahuallpa's robes had been torn off when the Spaniards pulled him
out of his litter. The Governor ordered clothes to be brought to him, and
when Atahuallpa was dressed, the Governor ordered Atahuallpa to sit
near him and soothed his rage and agitation at finding himself so quickly
fallen from his high estate. The Governor said to Atahuallpa, 'Do not take
it as an insult that you have been defeated and taken prisoner, for with the
Christians who come with me, though so few in number, I have conquered