26 " PROLOGUE
view is not held in esteem by historians; it is considered wrong or simplis
tic, or it is caricatured as environmental determinism and dismissed, or
else the whole subject of trying to understand worldwide differences is
shelved as too difficult. Yet geography obviously has some effect on his
tory; the open question concerns how much effect, and whether geography
can account for history's broad pattern.
The time is now ripe for a fresh look at these questions, because of
new information from scientific disciplines seemingly remote from human
history. Those disciplines include, above all, genetics, molecular biology,
and biogeography as applied to crops and their wild ancestors; the same
disciplines plus behavioral ecology, as applied to domestic animals and
their wild ancestors; molecular biology of human germs and related germs
of animals; epidemiology of human diseases; human genetics; linguistics;
archaeological studies on all continents and major islands; and studies of
the histories of technology, writing, and political organization.
This diversity of disciplines poses problems for would-be authors of a
book aimed at answering Yali's question. The author must possess a range
of expertise spanning the above disciplines, so that relevant advances can
be synthesized. The history and prehistory of each continent must be simi
larly synthesized. The book's subject matter is history, but the approach is
that of science—in particular, that of historical sciences such as evolution
ary biology and geology. The author must understand from firsthand expe
rience a range of human societies, from hunter-gatherer societies to
modern space-age civilizations.
These requirements seem at first to demand a multi-author work. Yet
that approach would be doomed from the outset, because the essence of
the problem is to develop a unified synthesis. That consideration dictates
single authorship, despite all the difficulties that it poses. Inevitably, that
single author will have to sweat copiously in order to assimilate material
from many disciplines, and will require guidance from many colleagues.
My background had led me to several of these disciplines even before
Yali put his question to me in 1972. My mother is a teacher and linguist;
my father, a physician specializing in the genetics of childhood diseases.
Because of my father's example, I went through school expecting to
become a physician. I had also become a fanatical bird-watcher by the age
of seven. It was thus an easy step, in my last undergraduate year at univer
sity, to shift from my initial goal of medicine to the goal of biological