COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA • 79
than it could be transmitted by mouth. That information, coming back to
Spain from Columbus's voyages and from Cortes's conquest of Mexico,
sent Spaniards pouring into the New World. Letters and pamphlets sup
plied both the motivation and the necessary detailed sailing directions. The
first published report of Pizarro's exploits, by his companion Captain Cris
tobal de Mena, was printed in Seville in April 1534, a mere nine months
after Atahuallpa's execution. It became a best-seller, was rapidly translated
into other European languages, and sent a further stream of Spanish colo
nists to tighten Pizarro's grip on Peru.
Why did Atahuallpa walk into the trap? In hindsight, we find it aston
ishing that Atahuallpa marched into Pizarro's obvious trap at Cajamarca.
The Spaniards who captured him were equally surprised at their success.
The consequences of literacy are prominent in the ultimate explanation.
The immediate explanation is that Atahuallpa had very little informa
tion about the Spaniards, their military power, and their intent. He derived
that scant information by word of mouth, mainly from an envoy who had
visited Pizarro's force for two days while it was en route inland from the
coast. That envoy saw the Spaniards at their most disorganized, told Ata
huallpa that they were not fighting men, and that he could tie them all up
if given 200 Indians. Understandably, it never occurred to Atahuallpa that
the Spaniards were formidable and would attack him without provoca
tion.
In the New World the ability to write was confined to small elites
among some peoples of modern Mexico and neighboring areas far to the
north of the Inca Empire. Although the Spanish conquest of Panama, a
mere 600 miles from the Incas' northern boundary, began already in 1510,
no knowledge even of the Spaniards' existence appears to have reached
the Incas until Pizarro's first landing on the Peruvian coast in 1527. Ata
huallpa remained entirely ignorant about Spain's conquests of Central
America's most powerful and populous Indian societies.
As surprising to us today as Atahuallpa's behavior leading to his capture
is his behavior thereafter. He offered his famous ransom in the naive belief
that, once paid off, the Spaniards would release him and depart. He had
no way of understanding that Pizarro's men formed the spearhead of a
force bent on permanent conquest, rather than an isolated raid.
Atahuallpa was not alone in these fatal miscalculations. Even after Ata
huallpa had been captured, Francisco Pizarro's brother Hernando Pizarro
deceived Atahuallpa's leading general, Chalcuchima, commanding a large