108 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
simply taste good. All other things being equal, people seek to maximize
their return of calories, protein, or other specific food categories by forag
ing in a way that yields the most return with the greatest certainty in.the
least time for the least effort. Simultaneously, they seek to minimize their
risk of starving: moderate but reliable returns are preferable to a fluctuat
ing lifestyle with a high time-averaged rate of return but a substantial like
lihood of starving to death. One suggested function of the first gardens of
nearly 11,000 years ago was to provide a reliable reserve larder as insur
ance in case wild food supplies failed.
Conversely, men hunters tend to guide themselves by considerations of
prestige: for example, they might rather go giraffe hunting every day, bag
a giraffe once a month, and thereby gain the status of great hunter, than
bring home twice a giraffe's weight of food in a month by humbling them
selves and reliably gathering nuts every day. People are also guided by
seemingly arbitrary cultural preferences, such as considering fish either
delicacies or taboo. Finally, their priorities are heavily influenced by the
relative values they attach to different lifestyles—just as we can see today.
For instance, in the 19th-century U.S. West, the cattlemen, sheepmen, and
farmers all despised each other. Similarly, throughout human history farm
ers have tended to despise hunter-gatherers as primitive, hunter-gatherers
have despised farmers as ignorant, and herders have despised both. All
these elements come into play in people's separate decisions about how to
obtain their food.
As
WE ALREADY noted, the first farmers on each continent could not
have chosen farming consciously, because there were no other nearby
farmers for them to observe. However, once food production had arisen
in one part of a continent, neighboring hunter-gatherers could see the
result and make conscious decisions. In some cases the hunter-gatherers
adopted the neighboring system of food production virtually as a complete
package; in others they chose only certain elements of it; and in still others
they rejected food production entirely and remained hunter-gatherers.
For example, hunter-gatherers in parts of southeastern Europe had
quickly adopted Southwest Asian cereal crops, pulse crops, and livestock
simultaneously as a complete package by around 6000 B.c. All three of
these elements also spread rapidly through central Europe in the centuries
before 5000 B.C. Adoption of food production may have been rapid and