I 6 • PROLOGUE
islands, much of the Americas, and small parts of sub-Saharan Africa—
lived as farming tribes or even still as hunter-gatherer bands using stone
tools.
Of course, those technological and political differences as of A.D. 1500
were the immediate cause of the modern world's inequalities. Empires with
steel weapons were able to conquer or exterminate tribes with weapons of
stone and wood. How, though, did the world get to be the way it was in
A.D. 1500?
Once again, we can easily push this question back one step further, by
drawing on written histories and archaeological discoveries. Until the end
of the last Ice Age, around 11,000 B.C., all peoples on all continents were
still hunter-gatherers. Different rates of development on different conti
nents, from 11,000 B.C. to A.D. 1500, were what led to the technological
and political inequalities of A.D. 1500. While Aboriginal Australians and
many Native Americans remained hunter-gatherers, most of Eurasia and
much of the Americas and sub-Saharan Africa gradually developed agri
culture, herding, metallurgy, and complex political organization. Parts of
Eurasia, and one area of the Americas, independently developed writing
as well. However, each of these new developments appeared earlier in
Eurasia than elsewhere. For instance, the mass production of bronze tools,
which was just beginning in the South American Andes in the centuries
before A.D. 1500, was already established in parts of Eurasia over 4,000
years earlier. The stone technology of the Tasmanians, when first encoun
tered by European explorers in A.D. 1642, was simpler than that prevalent
in parts of Upper Paleolithic Europe tens of thousands of years earlier.
Thus, we can finally rephrase the question about the modern world's
inequalities as follows: why did human development proceed at such dif
ferent rates on different continents? Those disparate rates constitute histo
ry's broadest pattern and my book's subject.
While this book is thus ultimately about history and prehistory, its sub
ject is not of just academic interest but also of overwhelming practical and
political importance. The history of interactions among disparate peoples
is what shaped the modern world through conquest, epidemics, and geno
cide. Those collisions created reverberations that have still not died down
after many centuries, and that are actively continuing in some of the
world's most troubled areas today.
For example, much of Africa is still struggling with its legacies from
recent colonialism. In other regions—including much of Central America,