FARMER POWER • 91
ing our main means of land transport until the development of railroads
in the 19th century. Before animal domestication, the sole means of trans
porting goods and people by land was on the backs of humans. Large
mammals changed that: for the first time in human history, it became pos
sible to move heavy goods in large quantities, as well as people, rapidly
overland for long distances. The domestic animals that were ridden were
the horse, donkey, yak, reindeer, and Arabian and Bactrian camels. Ani
mals of those same five species, as well as the llama, were used to bear
packs. Cows and horses were hitched to wagons, while reindeer and dogs
pulled sleds in the Arctic. The horse became the chief means of long-dis
tance transport over most of Eurasia. The three domestic camel species
(Arabian camel, Bactrian camel, and llama) played a similar role in areas
of North Africa and Arabia, Central Asia, and the Andes, respectively.
The most direct contribution of plant and animal domestication to wars
of conquest was from Eurasia's horses, whose military role made them the
jeeps and Sherman tanks of ancient warfare on that continent. As I men
tioned in Chapter 3, they enabled Cortes and Pizarro, leading only small
bands of adventurers, to overthrow the Aztec and Inca Empires. Even
much earlier (around 4000 B.C.), at a time when horses were still ridden
bareback, they may have been the essential military ingredient behind the
westward expansion of speakers of Indo-European languages from the
Ukraine. Those languages eventually replaced all earlier western European
languages except Basque. When horses later were yoked to wagons and
other vehicles, horse-drawn battle chariots (invented around 1800 B.C.)
proceeded to revolutionize warfare in the Near East, the Mediterranean
region, and China. For example, in 1674 B.C., horses even enabled a for
eign people, the Hyksos, to conquer then horseless Egypt and to establish
themselves temporarily as pharaohs.
Still later, after the invention of saddles and stirrups, horses allowed the
Huns and successive waves of other peoples from the Asian steppes to
terrorize the Roman Empire and its successor states, culminating in the
Mongol conquests of much of Asia and Russia in the 13th and 14th centu
ries A.D. Only with the introduction of trucks and tanks in World War I did
horses finally become supplanted as the main assault vehicle and means of
fast transport in war. Arabian and Bactrian camels played a similar mili
tary role within their geographic range. In all these examples, peoples with
domestic horses (or camels), or with improved means of using them,
enjoyed an enormous military advantage over those without them.