392 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Pygmies, or because the people themselves disappeared.
The survival of modern Africa's four native language families (that is,
the four other than the recently arrived Austronesian language of Mada
gascar) isn't due to the intrinsic superiority of those languages as vehicles
for communication. Instead, it must be attributed to a historical accident:
ancestral speakers of Nilo-Saharan, Niger-Congo, and Afroasiatic hap
pened to be living at the right place and time to acquire domestic plants
and animals, which let them multiply and either replace other peoples or
impose their language. The few modern Khoisan speakers survived mainly
because of their isolation in areas of southern Africa unsuitable for Bantu
farming.
BEFORE WE TRACE Khoisan survival beyond the Bantu tide, let's see
what archaeology tells us about Africa's other great prehistoric population
movement—the Austronesian colonization of Madagascar. Archaeologists
exploring Madagascar have now proved that Austronesians had arrived at
least by A.D. 800, possibly as early as A.D. 300. There the Austronesians
encountered (and proceeded to exterminate) a strange world of living ani
mals as distinctive as if they had come from another planet, because those
animals had evolved on Madagascar during its long isolation. They
included giant elephant birds, primitive primates called lemurs as big as
gorillas, and pygmy hippos. Archaeological excavations of the earliest
human settlements on Madagascar yield remains of iron tools, livestock,
and crops, so the colonists were not just a small canoeload of fishermen
blown off course; they formed a full-fledged expedition. How did that
prehistoric 4,000-mile expedition come about?
One hint is in an ancient book of sailors' directions, the Periplus of the
Erythrean Sea, written by an anonymous merchant living in Egypt around
A.D. 100. The merchant describes an already thriving sea trade connecting
India and Egypt with the coast of East Africa. With the spread of Islam
after A.D. 800, Indian Ocean trade becomes well documented archaeologi
cally by copious quantities of Mideastern (and occasionally even Chinese!)
products such as pottery, glass, and porcelain in East African coastal settle
ments. The traders waited for favorable winds to let them cross the Indian
Ocean directly between East Africa and India. When the Portuguese navi
gator Vasco da Gama became the first European to sail around the south
ern cape of Africa and reached the Kenya coast in 1498, he encountered