THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE • 411
has been elucidated by paleobotanists and archaeologists. Its woodlands
were cleared for agriculture, or cut to obtain construction timber, or
burned as firewood or for manufacturing plaster. Because of low rainfall
and hence low primary productivity (proportional to rainfall), regrowth
of vegetation could not keep pace with its destruction, especially in the
presence of overgrazing by abundant goats. With the tree and grass cover
removed, erosion proceeded and valleys silted up, while irrigation agricul
ture in the low-rainfall environment led to salt accumulation. These pro
cesses, which began in the Neolithic era, continued into modern times. For
instance, the last forests near the ancient Nabataean capital of Petra, in
modern Jordan, were felled by the Ottoman Turks during construction of
the Hejaz railroad just before World War I.
Thus, Fertile Crescent and eastern Mediterranean societies had the mis
fortune to arise in an ecologically fragile environment. They committed
ecological suicide by destroying their own resource base. Power shifted
westward as each eastern Mediterranean society in turn undermined itself,
beginning with the oldest societies, those in the east (the Fertile Crescent).
Northern and western Europe has been spared this fate, not because its
inhabitants have been wiser but because they have had the good luck to
live in a more robust environment with higher rainfall, in which vegetation
regrows quickly. Much of northern and western Europe is still able to
support productive intensive agriculture today, 7,000 years after the
arrival of food production. In effect, Europe received its crops, livestock,
technology, and writing systems from the Fertile Crescent, which then
gradually eliminated itself as a major center of power and innovation.
That is how the Fertile Crescent lost its huge early lead over Europe.
Why did China also lose its lead? Its falling behind is initially surprising,
because China enjoyed undoubted advantages: a rise of food production
nearly as early as in the Fertile Crescent; ecological diversity from North
to South China and from the coast to the high mountains of the Tibetan
plateau, giving rise to a diverse set of crops, animals, and technology; a
large and productive expanse, nourishing the largest regional human pop
ulation in the world; and an environment less dry or ecologically fragile
than the Fertile Crescent's, allowing China still to support productive
intensive agriculture after nearly 10,000 years, though its environmental
problems are increasing today and are more serious than western Europe's.
These advantages and head start enabled medieval China to lead the
world in technology. The long list of its major technological firsts includes