276 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
lineages was from those where the political unit was a single autonomous
village, to those consisting of a regional assemblage of villages in which
the largest village with a paramount chief controlled the smaller villages
with lesser chiefs.
BY NOW, IT should be obvious that chiefdoms introduced the dilemma
fundamental to all centrally governed, nonegalitarian societies. At best,
they do good by providing expensive services impossible to contract for on
an individual basis. At worst, they function unabashedly as kleptocracies,
transferring net wealth from commoners to upper classes. These noble and
selfish functions are inextricably linked, although some governments
emphasize much more of one function than of the other. The difference
between a kleptocrat and a wise statesman, between a robber baron and a
public benefactor, is merely one of degree: a matter of just how large a
percentage of the tribute extracted from producers is retained by the elite,
and how much the commoners like the public uses to which the redistrib
uted tribute is put. We consider President Mobutu of Zaire a kleptocrat
because he keeps too much tribute (the equivalent of billions of dollars)
and redistributes too little tribute (no functioning telephone system in
Zaire). We consider George Washington a statesman because he spent tax
money on widely admired programs and did not enrich himself as presi
dent. Nevertheless, George Washington was born into wealth, which is
much more unequally distributed in the United States than in New Guinea
villages.
For any ranked society, whether a chiefdom or a state, one thus has to
ask: why do the commoners tolerate the transfer of the fruits of their hard
labor to kleptocrats? This question, raised by political theorists from Plato
to Marx, is raised anew by voters in every modern election. Kleptocracies
with little public support run the risk of being overthrown, either by
downtrodden commoners or by upstart would-be replacement kleptocrats
seeking public support by promising a higher ratio of services rendered to
fruits stolen. For example, Hawaiian history was repeatedly punctuated
by revolts against repressive chiefs, usually led by younger brothers prom
ising less oppression. This may sound funny to us in the context of old
Hawaii, until we reflect on all the misery still being caused by such strug
gles in the modern world.
What should an elite do to gain popular support while still maintaining