THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE • 421
label themselves "Department of Historical Science." Most historians do
not think of themselves as scientists and receive little training in acknowl
edged sciences and their methodologies. The sense that history is nothing
more than a mass of details is captured in numerous aphorisms: "History
is just one damn fact after another," "History is more or less bunk,"
"There is no law of history any more than of a kaleidoscope," and so on.
One cannot deny that it is more difficult to extract general principles
from studying history than from studying planetary orbits. However, the
difficulties seem to me not fatal. Similar ones apply to other historical sub
jects whose place among the natural sciences is nevertheless secure, includ
ing astronomy, climatology, ecology, evolutionary biology, geology, and
paleontology. People's image of science is unfortunately often based on
physics and a few other fields with similar methodologies. Scientists in
those fields tend to be ignorantly disdainful of fields to which those meth
odologies are inappropriate and which must therefore seek other method
ologies—such as my own research areas of ecology and evolutionary
biology. But recall that the word "science" means "knowledge" (from the
Latin scire, "to know," and scientia, "knowledge"), to be obtained by
whatever methods are most appropriate to the particular field. Hence I
have much empathy with students of human history for the difficulties
they face.
Historical sciences in the broad sense (including astronomy and the like)
share many features that set them apart from nonhistorical sciences such
as physics, chemistry, and molecular biology. I would single out four:
methodology, causation, prediction, and complexity.
In physics the chief method for gaining knowledge is the laboratory
experiment, by which one manipulates the parameter whose effect is in
question, executes parallel control experiments with that parameter held
constant, holds other parameters constant throughout, replicates both the
experimental manipulation and the control experiment, and obtains quan
titative data. This strategy, which also works well in chemistry and molec
ular biology, is so identified with science in the minds of many people that
experimentation is often held to be the essence of the scientific method. But
laboratory experimentation can obviously play little or no role in many of
the historical sciences. One cannot interrupt galaxy formation, start and
stop hurricanes and ice ages, experimentally exterminate grizzly bears in a
few national parks, or rerun the course of dinosaur evolution. Instead, one