110 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
problem of disentangling cause and effect in the rise of food production.
However, five main contributing factors can still be identified; the contro
versies revolve mainly around their relative importance.
One factor is the decline in the availability of wild foods. The lifestyle
of hunter-gatherers has become increasingly less rewarding over the past
13,000 years, as resources on which they depended (especially animal
resources) have become less abundant or even disappeared. As we saw in
Chapter 1, most large mammal species became extinct in North and South
America at the end of the Pleistocene, and some became extinct in Eurasia
and Africa, either because of climate changes or because of the rise in skill
and numbers of human hunters. While the role of animal extinctions in
eventually (after a long lag) nudging ancient Native Americans, Eurasians,
and Africans toward food production can be debated, there are numerous
incontrovertible cases on islands in more recent times. Only after the first
Polynesian settlers had exterminated moas and decimated seal populations
on New Zealand, and exterminated or decimated seabirds and land birds
on other Polynesian islands, did they intensify their food production. For
instance, although the Polynesians who colonized Easter Island around
A.D. 500 brought chickens with them, chicken did not become a major
food until wild birds and porpoises were no longer readily available as
food. Similarly, a suggested contributing factor to the rise of animal
domestication in the Fertile Crescent was the decline in abundance of the
wild gazelles that had previously been a major source of meat for hunter-
gatherers in that area.
A second factor is that, just as the depletion of wild game tended to
make hunting-gathering less rewarding, an increased availability of
domesticable wild plants made steps leading to plant domestication more
rewarding. For instance, climate changes at the end of the Pleistocene in
the Fertile Crescent greatly expanded the area of habitats with wild cere
als, of which huge crops could be harvested in a short time. Those wild
cereal harvests were precursors to the domestication of the earliest crops,
the cereals wheat and barley, in the Fertile Crescent.
Still another factor tipping the balance away from hunting-gathering
was the cumulative development of technologies on which food produc
tion would eventually depend—technologies for collecting, processing,
and storing wild foods. What use can would-be farmers make of a ton of
wheat grains on the stalk, if they have not first figured out how to harvest,
husk, and store them? The necessary methods, implements, and facilities