COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA • 75
centuries were those tribes that reduced the military disparity by acquiring
and mastering both horses and guns. To the average white American, the
word "Indian" conjures up an image of a mounted Plains Indian bran
dishing a rifle, like the Sioux warriors who annihilated General George
Custer's U.S. Army battalion at the famous battle of the Little Big Horn in
1876. We easily forget that horses and rifles were originally unknown to
Native Americans. They were brought by Europeans and proceeded to
transform the societies of Indian tribes that acquired them. Thanks to their
mastery of horses and rifles, the Plains Indians of North America, the
Araucanian Indians of southern Chile, and the Pampas Indians of Argen
tina fought off invading whites longer than did any other Native Ameri
cans, succumbing only to massive army operations by white governments
in the 1870s and 1880s.
Today, it is hard for us to grasp the enormous numerical odds against
which the Spaniards' military equipment prevailed. At the battle of Caja¬
marca recounted above, 168 Spaniards crushed a Native American army
500 times more numerous, killing thousands of natives while not losing a
single Spaniard. Time and again, accounts of Pizarro's subsequent battles
with the Incas, Cortes's conquest of the Aztecs, and other early European
campaigns against Native Americans describe encounters in which a few
dozen European horsemen routed thousands of Indians with great slaugh
ter. During Pizarro's march from Cajamarca to the Inca capital of Cuzco
after Atahuallpa's death, there were four such battles: at Jauja, Vilcashua¬
man, Vilcaconga, and Cuzco. Those four battles involved a mere 80, 30,
110, and 40 Spanish horsemen, respectively, in each case ranged against
thousands or tens of thousands of Indians.
These Spanish victories cannot be written off as due merely to the help
of Native American allies, to the psychological novelty of Spanish weap
ons and horses, or (as is often claimed) to the Incas' mistaking Spaniards
for their returning god Viracocha. The initial successes of both Pizarro and
Cortes did attract native allies. However, many of them would not have
become allies if they had not already been persuaded, by earlier devasta
ting successes of unassisted Spaniards, that resistance was futile and that
they should side with the likely winners. The novelty of horses, steel weap
ons, and guns undoubtedly paralyzed the Incas at Cajamarca, but the bat
tles after Cajamarca were fought against determined resistance by Inca
armies that had already seen Spanish weapons and horses. Within half a