YALI'S QUESTION • 3 I
Asian mainland and Pacific islands. The rise of food production in China
spawned several great prehistoric movements of human populations, or of
cultural traits, or of both. One of those movements, within China itself,
created the political and cultural phenomenon of China as we know it
today. Another resulted in a replacement, throughout almost the whole
of tropical Southeast Asia, of indigenous hunter-gatherers by farmers of
ultimately South Chinese origin. Still another, the Austronesian expansion,
similarly replaced the indigenous hunter-gatherers of the Philippines and
Indonesia and spread out to the most remote islands of Polynesia, but was
unable to colonize Australia and most of New Guinea. To the student of
world history, all those collisions among East Asian and Pacific peoples
are doubly important: they formed the countries where one-third of the
modern world's population lives, and in which economic power is increas
ingly becoming concentrated; and they furnish especially clear models for
understanding the histories of peoples elsewhere in the world.
Chapter 18 returns to the problem introduced in Chapter 3, the colli
sion between European and Native American peoples. A summary of the
last 13,000 years of New World and western Eurasian history makes clear
how Europe's conquest of the Americas was merely the culmination of two
long and mostly separate historical trajectories. The differences between
those trajectories were stamped by continental differences in domesticable
plants and animals, germs, times of settlement, orientation of continental
axes, and ecological barriers.
Finally, the history of sub-Saharan Africa (Chapter 19) offers striking
similarities as well as contrasts with New World history. The same factors
that molded Europeans' encounters with Africans molded their encounters
with Native Americans as well. But Africa also differed from the Americas
in all these factors. As a result, European conquest did not create wide
spread or lasting European settlement of sub-Saharan Africa, except in the
far south. Of more lasting significance was a large-scale population shift
within Africa itself, the Bantu expansion. It proves to have been triggered
by many of the same causes that played themselves out at Cajamarca, in
East Asia, on Pacific islands, and in Australia and New Guinea.
I harbor no illusions that these chapters have succeeded in explaining
the histories of all the continents for the past 13,000 years. Obviously, that
would be impossible to accomplish in a single book even if we did under
stand all the answers, which we don't. At best, this book identifies several
constellations of environmental factors that I believe provide a large part