80 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
army, into delivering himself to the Spaniards. Chalcuchima's miscalcula
tion marked a turning point in the collapse of Inca resistance, a moment
almost as significant as the capture of Atahuallpa himself. The Aztec
emperor Montezuma miscalculated even more grossly when he took Cor
tes for a returning god and admitted him and his tiny army into the Aztec
capital of Tenochtitlan. The result was that Cortes captured Montezuma,
then went on to conquer Tenochtitlan and the Aztec Empire.
On a mundane level, the miscalculations by Atahuallpa, Chalcuchima,
Montezuma, and countless other Native American leaders deceived by
Europeans were due to the fact that no living inhabitants of the New
World had been to the Old World, so of course they could have had no
specific information about the Spaniards. Even so, we find it hard to avoid
the conclusion that Atahuallpa "should" have been more suspicious, if
only his society had experienced a broader range of human behavior.
Pizarro too arrived at Cajamarca with no information about the Incas
other than what he had learned by interrogating the Inca subjects he
encountered in 1527 and 1531. However, while Pizarro himself happened
to be illiterate, he belonged to a literate tradition. From books, the Span
iards knew of many contemporary civilizations remote from Europe, and
about several thousand years of European history. Pizarro explicitly mod
eled his ambush of Atahuallpa on the successful strategy of Cortes.
In short, literacy made the Spaniards heirs to a huge body of knowledge
about human behavior and history. By contrast, not only did Atahuallpa
have no conception of the Spaniards themselves, and no personal experi
ence of any other invaders from overseas, but he also had not even heard
(or read) of similar threats to anyone else, anywhere else, anytime pre
viously in history. That gulf of experience encouraged Pizarro to set his
trap and Atahuallpa to walk into it.
THUS, PIZARRO'S CAPTURE of Atahuallpa illustrates the set of proxi
mate factors that resulted in Europeans' colonizing the New World instead
of Native Americans' colonizing Europe. Immediate reasons for Pizarro's
success included military technology based on guns, steel weapons, and
horses; infectious diseases endemic in Eurasia; European maritime technol
ogy; the centralized political organization of European states; and writing.
The title of this book will serve as shorthand for those proximate factors,
which also enabled modern Europeans to conquer peoples of other conti-