138 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
(for example, by a root that genetically duplicates the parent plant). Thus,
the high percentage of hermaphroditic selfers in the Fertile Crescent flora
aided early farmers, because it meant that a high percentage of the wild
flora had a reproductive biology convenient for humans.
Selfers were also convenient for early farmers in that they occasionally
did become cross-pollinated, thereby generating new varieties among
which to select. That occasional cross-pollination occurred not only
between individuals of the same species, but also between related species
to produce interspecific hybrids. One such hybrid among Fertile Crescent
selfers, bread wheat, became the most valuable crop in the modern world.
Of the first eight significant crops to have been domesticated in the Fer
tile Crescent, all were selfers. Of the three selfer cereals among them—
einkorn wheat, emmer wheat, and barley—the wheats offered the addi
tional advantage of a high protein content, 8-14 percent. In contrast, the
most important cereal crops of eastern Asia and of the New World—rice
and corn, respectively—had a lower protein content that posed significant
nutritional problems.
THOSE WERE SOME of the advantages that the Fertile Crescent's flora
afforded the first farmers: it included an unusually high percentage of wild
plants suitable for domestication. However, the Mediterranean climate
zone of the Fertile Crescent extends westward through much of southern
Europe and northwestern Africa. There are also zones of similar Mediter
ranean climates in four other parts of the world: California, Chile, south
western Australia, and South Africa (Figure 8.2). Yet those other
Mediterranean zones not only failed to rival the Fertile Crescent as early
sites of food production; they never gave rise to indigenous agriculture at
all. What advantage did that particular Mediterranean zone of western
Eurasia enjoy?
It turns out that it, and especially its Fertile Crescent portion, possessed
at least five advantages over other Mediterranean zones. First, western
Eurasia has by far the world's largest zone of Mediterranean climate. As a
result, it has a high diversity of wild plant and animal species, higher than
in the comparatively tiny Mediterranean zones of southwestern Australia
and Chile. Second, among Mediterranean zones, western Eurasia's experi
ences the greatest climatic variation from season to season and year to
year. That variation favored the evolution, among the flora, of an espe-