3 66 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
served for a long time just as a small supplement to food acquisition by
hunting-gathering, and supported only a sparse population. If one accepts
the traditional, earlier dates for the onset of American plant domestica
tion, then 5,000 years instead of 1,500 or 2,000 years elapsed before food
production supported villages. In contrast, villages were closely associated
in time with the rise of food production in much of Eurasia. (The hunter-
gatherer lifestyle itself was sufficiently productive to support villages even
before the adoption of agriculture in parts of both hemispheres, such as
Japan and the Fertile Crescent in the Old World, and coastal Ecuador and
Amazonia in the New World.) The limitations imposed by locally available
domesticates in the New World are well illustrated by the transformations
of Native American societies themselves when other crops or animals
arrived, whether from elsewhere in the Americas or from Eurasia. Exam
ples include the effects of corn's arrival in the eastern United States and
Amazonia, the llama's adoption in the northern Andes after its domestica
tion to the south, and the horse's appearance in many parts of North and
South America.
In addition to Eurasia's head start and wild animal and plant species,
developments in Eurasia were also accelerated by the easier diffusion of
animals, plants, ideas, technology, and people in Eurasia than in the Amer
icas, as a result of several sets of geographic and ecological factors. Euras
ia's east-west major axis, unlike the Americas' north-south major axis,
permitted diffusion without change in latitude and associated environmen
tal variables. In contrast to Eurasia's consistent east-west breadth, the
New World was constricted over the whole length of Central America and
especially at Panama. Not least, the Americas were more fragmented by
areas unsuitable for food production or for dense human populations.
These ecological barriers included the rain forests of the Panamanian isth
mus separating Mesoamerican societies from Andean and Amazonian
societies; the deserts of northern Mexico separating Mesoamerica from
U.S. southwestern and southeastern societies; dry areas of Texas separat
ing the U.S. Southwest from the Southeast; and the deserts and high moun
tains fencing off U.S. Pacific coast areas that would otherwise have been
suitable for food production. As a result, there was no diffusion of domes
tic animals, writing, or political entities, and limited or slow diffusion of
crops and technology, between the New World centers of Mesoamerica,
the eastern United States, and the Andes and Amazonia.
Some specific consequences of these barriers within the Americas