YALI'S QUESTION • 29
sisting of Chapters 4-10, is devoted to what I believe to be the most
important constellation of ultimate causes. Chapter 4 sketches how food
production—that is, the growing of food by agriculture or herding, instead
of the hunting and gathering of wild foods—ultimately led to the immedi
ate factors permitting Pizarro's triumph. But the rise of food production
varied around the globe. As we shall see in Chapter 5, peoples in some
parts of the world developed food production by themselves; some other
peoples acquired it in prehistoric times from those independent centers;
and still others neither developed nor acquired food production prehistori¬
cally but remained hunter-gatherers until modern times. Chapter 6
explores the numerous factors driving the shift from the hunter-gatherer
lifestyle toward food production, in some areas but not in others.
Chapters 7, 8, and 9 then show how crops and livestock came in prehis
toric times to be domesticated from ancestral wild plants and animals, by
incipient farmers and herders who could have had no vision of the out
come. Geographic differences in the local suites of wild plants and animals
available for domestication go a long way toward explaining why only a
few areas became independent centers of food production, and why it
arose earlier in some of those areas than in others. From those few centers
of origin, food production spread much more rapidly to some areas than
to others. A major factor contributing to those differing rates of spread
turns out to have been the orientation of the continents' axes: predomi
nantly west-east for Eurasia, predominantly north-south for the Americas
and Africa (Chapter 10).
Thus, Chapter 3 sketched the immediate factors behind Europe's con
quest of Native Americans, and Chapter 4 the development of those fac
tors from the ultimate cause of food production. In Part 3 ("From Food
to Guns, Germs, and Steel," Chapters 11-14), the connections from ulti
mate to proximate causes are traced in detail, beginning with the evolution
of germs characteristic of dense human populations (Chapter 11). Far
more Native Americans and other non-Eurasian peoples were killed by
Eurasian germs than by Eurasian guns or steel weapons. Conversely, few
or no distinctive lethal germs awaited would-be European conquerors in
the New World. Why was the germ exchange so unequal? Here, the results
of recent molecular biological studies are illuminating in linking germs to
the rise of food production, in Eurasia much more than in the Americas.
Another chain of causation led from food production to writing, possi
bly the most important single invention of the last few thousand years