398 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Africa was the sole cradle of human evolution for millions of years, as well
as perhaps the homeland of anatomically modern Homo sapiens. To these
advantages of Africa's enormous head start were added those of highly
diverse climates and habitats and of the world's highest human diversity.
An extraterrestrial visiting Earth 10,000 years ago might have been for
given for predicting that Europe would end up as a set of vassal states of
a sub-Saharan African empire.
The proximate reasons behind the outcome of Africa's collision with
Europe are clear. Just as in their encounter with Native Americans, Euro
peans entering Africa enjoyed the triple advantage of guns and other tech
nology, widespread literacy, and the political organization necessary to
sustain expensive programs of exploration and conquest. Those advan
tages manifested themselves almost as soon as the collisions started: barely
four years after Vasco da Gama first reached the East African coast, in
1498, he returned with a fleet bristling with cannons to compel the surren
der of East Africa's most important port, Kilwa, which controlled the Zim
babwe gold trade. But why did Europeans develop those three advantages
before sub-Saharan Africans could?
As we have discussed, all three arose historically from the development
of food production. But food production was delayed in sub-Saharan
Africa (compared with Eurasia) by Africa's paucity of domesticable native
animal and plant species, its much smaller area suitable for indigenous
food production, and its north-south axis, which retarded the spread of
food production and inventions. Let's examine how those factors oper
ated.
First, as regards domestic animals, we've already seen that those of sub-
Saharan Africa came from Eurasia, with the possible exception of a few
from North Africa. As a result, domestic animals did not reach sub-
Saharan Africa until thousands of years after they began to be utilized by
emerging Eurasian civilizations. That's initially surprising, because we
think of Africa as the continent of big wild mammals. But we saw in Chap
ter 9 that a wild animal, to be domesticated, must be sufficiently docile,
submissive to humans, cheap to feed, and immune to diseases and must
grow rapidly and breed well in captivity. Eurasia's native cows, sheep,
goats, horses, and pigs were among the world's few large wild animal spe
cies to pass all those tests. Their African equivalents—such as the African
buffalo, zebra, bush pig, rhino, and hippopotamus—have never been
domesticated, not even in modern times.