38 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
arbitrary, since Homo erectus evolved into Homo sapiens. However, these
early Homo sapiens still differed from us in skeletal details, had brains
significantly smaller than ours, and were grossly different from us in their
artifacts and behavior. Modern stone-tool-making peoples, such as Yali's
great-grandparents, would have scorned the stone tools of half a million
years ago as very crude. The only other significant addition to our ances
tors' cultural repertoire that can be documented with confidence around
that time was the use of fire.
No art, bone tool, or anything else has come down to us from early
Homo sapiens except for their skeletal remains, plus those crude stone
tools. There were still no humans in Australia, for the obvious reason that
it would have taken boats to get there from Southeast Asia. There were
also no humans anywhere in the Americas, because that would have
required the occupation of the nearest part of the Eurasian continent (Sibe
ria), and possibly boat-building skills as well. (The present, shallow Bering
Strait, separating Siberia from Alaska, alternated between a strait and a
broad intercontinental bridge of dry land, as sea level repeatedly rose and
fell during the Ice Ages.) However, boat building and survival in cold Sibe
ria were both still far beyond the capabilities of early Homo sapiens.
After half a million years ago, the human populations of Africa and
western Eurasia proceeded to diverge from each other and from East Asian
populations in skeletal details. The population of Europe and western Asia
between 130,000 and 40,000 years ago is represented by especially many
skeletons, known as Neanderthals and sometimes classified as a separate
species, Homo neanderthalensis. Despite being depicted in innumerable
cartoons as apelike brutes living in caves, Neanderthals had brains slightly
larger than our own. They were also the first humans to leave behind
strong evidence of burying their dead and caring for their sick. Yet their
stone tools were still crude by comparison with modern New Guineans'
polished stone axes and were usually not yet made in standardized diverse
shapes, each with a clearly recognizable function.
The few preserved African skeletal fragments contemporary with the
Neanderthals are more similar to our modern skeletons than to Neander
thal skeletons. Even fewer preserved East Asian skeletal fragments are
known, but they appear different again from both Africans and Neander
thals. As for the lifestyle at that time, the best-preserved evidence comes
from stone artifacts and prey bones accumulated at southern African sites.
Although those Africans of 100,000 years ago had more modern skeletons