128 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
thrown in handfuls, resulting in a whole field devoted to a single crop.
Once cows, horses, and other large mammals were domesticated, they
were hitched to plows, and fields were tilled by animal power. In the New
World, however, no animal was ever domesticated that could be hitched
to a plow. Instead, fields were always tilled by hand-held sticks or hoes,
and seeds were planted individually by hand and not scattered as whole
handfuls. Most New World fields thus came to be mixed gardens of many
crops planted together, rather than monoculture.
Another major difference among agricultural systems involved the main
sources of calories and carbohydrates. As we have seen, these were cereals
in many areas. In other areas, though, that role of cereals was taken over
or shared by roots and tubers, which were of negligible importance in the
ancient Fertile Crescent and China. Manioc (alias cassava) and sweet
potato became staples in tropical South America, potato and oca in the
Andes, African yams in Africa, and Indo-Pacific yams and taro in South
east Asia and New Guinea. Tree crops, notably bananas and breadfruit,
also furnished carbohydrate-rich staples in Southeast Asia and New
Guinea.
THUS, BY ROMAN times, almost all of today's leading crops were being
cultivated somewhere in the world. Just as we shall see for domestic ani
mals too (Chapter 9), ancient hunter-gatherers were intimately familiar
with local wild plants, and ancient farmers evidently discovered and
domesticated almost all of those worth domesticating. Of course, medieval
monks did begin to cultivate strawberries and raspberries, and modern
plant breeders are still improving ancient crops and have added new minor
crops, notably some berries (like blueberries, cranberries, and kiwifruit)
and nuts (macadamias, pecans, and cashews). But these few modern addi
tions have remained of modest importance compared with ancient staples
like wheat, corn, and rice.
Still, our list of triumphs lacks many wild plants that, despite their value
as food, we never succeeded in domesticating. Notable among these fail
ures of ours are oak trees, whose acorns were a staple food of Native
Americans in California and the eastern United States as well as a fallback
food for European peasants in famine times of crop failure. Acorns are
nutritionally valuable, being rich in starch and oil. Like many otherwise
edible wild foods, most acorns do contain bitter tannins, but acorn lovers