14 " PROLOGUE
on every New Guinean's mind—the rapid pace of political developments.
Papua New Guinea, as Yali's nation is now called, was at that time still
administered by Australia as a mandate of the United Nations, but inde
pendence was in the air. Yali explained to me his role in getting local peo
ple to prepare for self-government.
After a while, Yali turned the conversation and began to quiz me. He
had never been outside New Guinea and had not been educated beyond
high school, but his curiosity was insatiable. First, he wanted to know
about my work on New Guinea birds (including how much I got paid for
it). I explained to him how different groups of birds had colonized New
Guinea over the course of millions of years. He then asked how the ances
tors of his own people had reached New Guinea over the last tens of thou
sands of years, and how white Europeans had colonized New Guinea
within the last 200 years.
The conversation remained friendly, even though the tension between
the two societies that Yali and I represented was familiar to both of us.
Two centuries ago, all New Guineans were still "living in the Stone Age."
That is, they still used stone tools similar to those superseded in Europe
by metal tools thousands of years ago, and they dwelt in villages not orga
nized under any centralized political authority. Whites had arrived,
imposed centralized government, and brought material goods whose value
New Guineans instantly recognized, ranging from steel axes, matches, and
medicines to clothing, soft drinks, and umbrellas. In New Guinea all these
goods were referred to collectively as "cargo."
Many of the white colonialists openly despised New Guineans as
"primitive." Even the least able of New Guinea's white "masters," as they
were still called in 1972, enjoyed a far higher standard of living than New
Guineans, higher even than charismatic politicians like Yali. Yet Yali had
quizzed lots of whites as he was then quizzing me, and I had quizzed lots
of New Guineans. He and I both knew perfectly well that New Guineans
are on the average at least as smart as Europeans. All those things must
have been on Yali's mind when, with yet another penetrating glance of his
flashing eyes, he asked me, "Why is it that you white people developed so
much cargo and brought it to New Guinea, but we black people had little
cargo of our own?"
It was a simple question that went to the heart of life as Yali experienced
it. Yes, there still is a huge difference between the lifestyle of the average