NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 6 I
gatherers are limited to technology that can be carried. If you move often
and lack vehicles or draft animals, you confine your possessions to babies,
weapons, and a bare minimum of other absolute necessities small enough
to carry. You can't be burdened with pottery and printing presses as you
shift camp. That practical difficulty probably explains the tantalizingly
early appearance of some technologies, followed by a long delay in their
further development. For example, the earliest attested precursors of
ceramics are fired clay figurines made in the area of modern Czechoslova
kia 27,000 years ago, long before the oldest known fired clay vessels (from
Japan 14,000 years ago). The same area of Czechoslovakia at the same
time has yielded the earliest evidence for weaving, otherwise not attested
until the oldest known basket appears around 13,000 years ago and the
oldest known woven cloth around 9,000 years ago. Despite these very
early first steps, neither pottery nor weaving took off until people became
sedentary and thereby escaped the problem of transporting pots and
looms.
Besides permitting sedentary living and hence the accumulation of pos
sessions, food production was decisive in the history of technology for
another reason. It became possible, for the first time in human evolution,
to develop economically specialized societies consisting of non-food-pro
ducing specialists fed by food-producing peasants. But we already saw, in
Part 2 of this book, that food production arose at different times in differ
ent continents. In addition, as we've seen in this chapter, local technology
depends, for both its origin and its maintenance, not only on local inven
tion but also on the diffusion of technology from elsewhere. That consider
ation tended to cause technology to develop most rapidly on continents
with few geographic and ecological barriers to diffusion, either within that
continent or on other continents. Finally, each society on a continent repre
sents one more opportunity to invent and adopt a technology, because
societies vary greatly in their innovativeness for many separate reasons.
Hence, all other things being equal, technology develops fastest in large
productive regions with large human populations, many potential inven
tors, and many competing societies.
Let us now summarize how variations in these three factors—time of
onset of food production, barriers to diffusion, and human population
size—led straightforwardly to the observed intercontinental differences in
the development of technology. Eurasia (effectively including North