36 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
vides the answer to Yali's question. Hence this chapter will offer a whirl
wind tour of human history on all the continents, for millions of years,
from our origins as a species until 13,000 years ago. All that will now be
summarized in less than 20 pages. Naturally, I shall gloss over details and
mention only what seem to me the trends most relevant to this book.
Our closest living relatives are three surviving species of great ape: the
gorilla, the common chimpanzee, and the pygmy chimpanzee (also known
as bonobo). Their confinement to Africa, along with abundant fossil evi
dence, indicates that the earliest stages of human evolution were also
played out in Africa. Human history, as something separate from the his
tory of animals, began there about 7 million years ago (estimates range
from 5 to 9 million years ago). Around that time, a population of African
apes broke up into several populations, of which one proceeded to evolve
into modern gorillas, a second into the two modern chimps, and the third
into humans. The gorilla line apparently split off slightly before the split
between the chimp and the human lines.
Fossils indicate that the evolutionary line leading to us had achieved a
substantially upright posture by around 4 million years ago, then began to
increase in body size and in relative brain size around 2.5 million years
ago. Those protohumans are generally known as Australopithecus afri¬
canus, Homo habilis, and Homo erectus, which apparently evolved into
each other in that sequence. Although Homo erectus, the stage reached
around 1.7 million years ago, was close to us modern humans in body
size, its brain size was still barely half of ours. Stone tools became common
around 2.5 million years ago, but they were merely the crudest of flaked
or battered stones. In zoological significance and distinctiveness, Homo
erectus was more than an ape, but still much less than a modern human.
All of that human history, for the first 5 or 6 million years after our
origins about 7 million years ago, remained confined to Africa. The first
human ancestor to spread beyond Africa was Homo erectus, as is attested
by fossils discovered on the Southeast Asian island of Java and convention
ally known as Java man (see Figure 1.1). The oldest Java "man" fossils—
of course, they may actually have belonged to a Java woman—have usu
ally been assumed to date from about a million years ago. However, it has
recently been argued that they actually date from 1.8 million years ago.
(Strictly speaking, the name Homo erectus belongs to these Javan fossils,
and the African fossils classified as Homo erectus may warrant a different
name.) At present, the earliest unquestioned evidence for humans in