62 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
single island. On the one hand, islands near one another might become
combined into a single political unit. On the other hand, single large rug
ged islands were divided into many independent political units. Hence the
area of the political unit varied not only with an island's area but also with
its fragmentation and isolation.
For small isolated islands without strong barriers to internal communi
cation, the entire island constituted the political unit—as in the case of
Anuta, with its 160 people. Many larger islands never did become unified
politically, whether because the population consisted of dispersed bands of
only a few dozen hunter-gatherers each (the Chathams and New Zealand's
southern South Island), or of farmers scattered over large distances (the
rest of New Zealand), or of farmers living in dense populations but in
rugged terrain precluding political unification. For example, people in
neighboring steep-sided valleys of the Marquesas communicated with each
other mainly by sea; each valley formed an independent political entity of
a few thousand inhabitants, and most individual large Marquesan islands
remained divided into many such entities.
The terrains of the Tongan, Samoan, Society, and Hawaiian islands did
permit political unification within islands, yielding political units of
10,000 people or more (over 30,000 on the large Hawaiian islands). The
distances between islands of the Tongan archipelago, as well as the dis
tances between Tonga and neighboring archipelagoes, were sufficiently
modest that a multi-island empire encompassing 40,000 people was even
tually established. Thus, Polynesian political units ranged in size from a
few dozen to 40,000 people.
A political unit's population size interacted with its population density
to influence Polynesian technology and economic, social, and political
organization. In general, the larger the size and the higher the density, the
more complex and specialized were the technology and organization, for
reasons that we shall examine in detail in later chapters. Briefly, at high
population densities only a portion of the people came to be farmers, but
they were mobilized to devote themselves to intensive food production,
thereby yielding surpluses to feed nonproducers. The nonproducers mobi
lizing them included chiefs, priests, bureaucrats, and warriors. The biggest
political units could assemble large labor forces to construct irrigation sys
tems and fishponds that intensified food production even further. These
developments were especially apparent on Tonga, Samoa, and the Socie
ties, all of which were fertile, densely populated, and moderately large by