3 38 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
ical Southeast Asians and South Chinese in other physical features besides
light skins and in their genes. A glance at a map makes it obvious that
Indonesia offered the only possible route by which humans could have
reached New Guinea and Australia 40,000 years ago, so one might naively
have expected modern Indonesians to be like modern New Guineans and
Australians. In reality, there are only a few New Guinean-like populations
in the Philippine / western Indonesia area, notably the Negritos living in
mountainous areas of the Philippines. As is also true of the three New
Guinean-like relict populations that I mentioned in speaking of tropical
Southeast Asia (Chapter 16), the Philippine Negritos could be relicts of
populations ancestral to Wiwor's people before they reached New Guinea.
Even those Negritos speak Austronesian languages similar to those of their
Filipino neighbors, implying that they too (like Malaysia's Semang
Negritos and Africa's Pygmies) have lost their original language.
All these facts suggest strongly that either tropical Southeast Asians or
South Chinese speaking Austronesian languages recently spread through
the Philippines and Indonesia, replacing all the former inhabitants of those
islands except the Philippine Negritos, and replacing all the original island
languages. That event evidently took place too recently for the colonists to
evolve dark skins, distinct language families, or genetic distinctiveness or
diversity. Their languages are of course much more numerous than the
eight dominant Chinese languages of mainland China, but are no more
diverse. The proliferation of many similar languages in the Philippines and
Indonesia merely reflects the fact that the islands never underwent a politi
cal and cultural unification, as did China.
Details of language distributions provide valuable clues to the route of
this hypothesized Austronesian expansion. The whole Austronesian lan
guage family consists of 959 languages, divided among four subfamilies.
But one of those subfamilies, termed Malayo-Polynesian, comprises 945
of those 959 languages and covers almost the entire geographic range of
the Austronesian family. Before the recent overseas expansion of Europe
ans speaking Indo-European languages, Austronesian was the most wide
spread language family in the world. That suggests that the Malayo-
Polynesian subfamily differentiated recently out of the Austronesian fam
ily and spread far from the Austronesian homeland, giving rise to many
local languages, all of which are still closely related because there has been
too little time to develop large linguistic differences. For the location of
that Austronesian homeland, we should therefore look not to Malayo-