COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA • 71
ments were now close to our camp, and still more troops kept issuing from
the camp of the Indians. In front of Atahuallpa went 2,000 Indians who
swept the road ahead of him, and these were followed by the warriors,
half of whom were marching in the fields on one side of him and half on
the other side.
"First came a squadron of Indians dressed in clothes of different colors,
like a chessboard. They advanced, removing the straws from the ground
and sweeping the road. Next came three squadrons in different dresses,
dancing and singing. Then came a number of men with armor, large metal
plates, and crowns of gold and silver. So great was the amount of furniture
of gold and silver which they bore, that it was a marvel to observe how
the sun glinted upon it. Among them came the figure of Atahuallpa in a
very fine litter with the ends of its timbers covered in silver. Eighty lords
carried him on their shoulders, all wearing a very rich blue livery. Ata
huallpa himself was very richly dressed, with his crown on his head and a
collar of large emeralds around his neck. He sat on a small stool with a
rich saddle cushion resting on his litter. The litter was lined with parrot
feathers of many colors and decorated with plates of gold and silver.
"Behind Atahuallpa came two other litters and two hammocks, in
which were some high chiefs, then several squadrons of Indians with
crowns of gold and silver. These Indian squadrons began to enter the plaza
to the accompaniment of great songs, and thus entering they occupied
every part of the plaza. In the meantime all of us Spaniards were waiting
ready, hidden in a courtyard, full of fear. Many of us urinated without
noticing it, out of sheer terror. On reaching the center of the plaza, Ata
huallpa remained in his litter on high, while his troops continued to file in
behind him.
"Governor Pizarro now sent Friar Vicente de Valverde to go speak to
Atahuallpa, and to require Atahuallpa in the name of God and of the King
of Spain that Atahuallpa subject himself to the law of our Lord Jesus
Christ and to the service of His Majesty the King of Spain. Advancing with
a cross in one hand and the Bible in the other hand, and going among the
Indian troops up to the place where Atahuallpa was, the Friar thus
addressed him: 'I am a Priest of God, and I teach Christians the things of
God, and in like manner I come to teach you. What I teach is that which
God says to us in this Book. Therefore, on the part of God and of the
Christians, I beseech you to be their friend, for such is God's will, and it
will be for your good.'