2 74 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
features, such as a large fan worn over the back on Rennell Island in the
Southwest Pacific. A commoner encountering a chief was obliged to per
form ritual marks of respect, such as (on Hawaii) prostrating oneself. The
chief's orders might be transmitted through one or two levels of bureau
crats, many of whom were themselves low-ranked chiefs. However, in con
trast to state bureaucrats, chiefdom bureaucrats had generalized rather
than specialized roles. In Polynesian Hawaii the same bureaucrats (termed
konohiki) extracted tribute and oversaw irrigation and organized labor
corvees for the chief, whereas state societies have separate tax collectors,
water district managers, and draft boards.
A chiefdom's large population in a small area required plenty of food,
obtained by food production in most cases, by hunting-gathering in a few
especially rich areas. For example, American Indians of the Pacific North
west coast, such as the Kwakiutl, Nootka, and Tlingit Indians, lived under
chiefs in villages without any agriculture or domestic animals, because the
rivers and sea were so rich in salmon and halibut. The food surpluses gen
erated by some people, relegated to the rank of commoners, went to feed
the chiefs, their families, bureaucrats, and crafts specialists, who variously
made canoes, adzes, or spittoons or worked as bird catchers or tattooers.
Luxury goods, consisting of those specialized crafts products or else
rare objects obtained by long-distance trade, were reserved for chiefs. For
example, Hawaiian chiefs had feather cloaks, some of them consisting of
tens of thousands of feathers and requiring many human generations for
their manufacture (by commoner cloak makers, of course). That concen
tration of luxury goods often makes it possible to recognize chiefdoms
archaeologically, by the fact that some graves (those of chiefs) contain
much richer goods than other graves (those of commoners), in contrast
to the egalitarian burials of earlier human history. Some ancient complex
chiefdoms can also be distinguished from tribal villages by the remains of
elaborate public architecture (such as temples) and by a regional hierarchy
of settlements, with one site (the site of the paramount chief) being obvi
ously larger and having more administrative buildings and artifacts than
other sites.
Like tribes, chiefdoms consisted of multiple hereditary lineages living at
one site. However, whereas the lineages of tribal villages are equal-ranked
clans, in a chiefdom all members of the chief's lineage had hereditary per
quisites. In effect, the society was divided into hereditary chief and com
moner classes, with Hawaiian chiefs themselves subdivided into eight