LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK • 211
ter 3, the result of the throne's being left vacant was that two other sons
of Huayna Capac, Atahuallpa and Huascar, became embroiled in a civil
war that Pizarro exploited to conquer the divided Incas.
When we in the United States think of the most populous New World
societies existing in 1492, only those of the Aztecs and the Incas tend to
come to our minds. We forget that North America also supported popu
lous Indian societies in the most logical place, the Mississippi Valley, which
contains some of our best farmland today. In that case, however, conquis¬
tadores contributed nothing directly to the societies' destruction; Eurasian
germs, spreading in advance, did everything. When Hernando de Soto
became the first European conquistador to march through the southeast
ern United States, in 1540, he came across Indian town sites abandoned
two years earlier because the inhabitants had died in epidemics. These epi
demics had been transmitted from coastal Indians infected by Spaniards
visiting the coast. The Spaniards' microbes spread to the interior in
advance of the Spaniards themselves.
De Soto was still able to see some of the densely populated Indian towns
lining the lower Mississippi. After the end of his expedition, it was a long
time before Europeans again reached the Mississippi Valley, but Eurasian
microbes were now established in North America and kept spreading. By
the time of the next appearance of Europeans on the lower Mississippi,
that of French settlers in the late 1600s, almost all of those big Indian
towns had vanished. Their relics are the great mound sites of the Missis
sippi Valley. Only recently have we come to realize that many of the
mound-building societies were still largely intact when Columbus reached
the New World, and that they collapsed (probably as a result of disease)
between 1492 and the systematic European exploration of the Mississippi.
When I was young, American schoolchildren were taught that North
America had originally been occupied by only about one million Indians.
That low number was useful in justifying the white conquest of what could
be viewed as an almost empty continent. However, archaeological excava
tions, and scrutiny of descriptions left by the very first European explorers
on our coasts, now suggest an initial number of around 20 million Indians.
For the New World as a whole, the Indian population decline in the cen
tury or two following Columbus's arrival is estimated to have been as large
as 95 percent.
The main killers were Old World germs to which Indians had never
been exposed, and against which they therefore had neither immune nor