I 8 8 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
and all other native societies of Mexico remained without pack animals
and without any edible domestic mammals except for dogs.
Conversely, domestic turkeys of Mexico and domestic sunflowers of the
eastern United States might have thrived in the Andes, but their southward
spread was stopped by the intervening tropical climates. The mere 700
miles of north-south distance prevented Mexican corn, squash, and beans
from reaching the U.S. Southwest for several thousand years after their
domestication in Mexico, and Mexican chili peppers and chenopods never
did reach it in prehistoric times. For thousands of years after corn was
domesticated in Mexico, it failed to spread northward into eastern North
America, because of the cooler climates and shorter growing season pre
vailing there. At some time between A.D. 1 and A.D. 200, corn finally
appeared in the eastern United States but only as a very minor crop. Not
until around A.D. 900, after hardy varieties of corn adapted to northern
climates had been developed, could corn-based agriculture contribute to
the flowering of the most complex Native American society of North
America, the Mississippian culture—a brief flowering ended by European-
introduced germs arriving with and after Columbus.
Recall that most Fertile Crescent crops prove, upon genetic study, to
derive from only a single domestication process, whose resulting crop
spread so quickly that it preempted any other incipient domestications of
the same or related species. In contrast, many apparently widespread
Native American crops prove to consist of related species or even of geneti
cally distinct varieties of the same species, independently domesticated in
Mesoamerica, South America, and the eastern United States. Closely
related species replace each other geographically among the amaranths,
beans, chenopods, chili peppers, cottons, squashes, and tobaccos. Differ
ent varieties of the same species replace each other among the kidney
beans, lima beans, the chili pepper Capsicum annuum I chinense, and the
squash Cucurbita pepo. Those legacies of multiple independent domestica
tions may provide further testimony to the slow diffusion of crops along
the Americas' north-south axis.
Africa and the Americas are thus the two largest landmasses with a
predominantly north-south axis and resulting slow diffusion. In certain
other parts of the world, slow north-south diffusion was important on a
smaller scale. These other examples include the snail's pace of crop
exchange between Pakistan's Indus Valley and South India, the slow
spread of South Chinese food production into Peninsular Malaysia, and