THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE • 409
The most straightforward extension of this book will be to quantify
further, and thus to establish more convincingly the role of, intercontinen
tal differences in the four sets of factors that appear to be most important.
To illustrate differences in starting materials for domestication, I provided
numbers for each continent's total of large wild terrestrial mammalian her
bivores and omnivores (Table 9.2) and of large-seeded cereals (Table 8.1).
One extension would be to assemble corresponding numbers for large-
seeded legumes (pulses), such as beans, peas, and vetches. In addition, I
mentioned factors disqualifying big mammalian candidates for domestica
tion, but I did not tabulate how many candidates are disqualified by each
factor on each continent. It would be interesting to do so, especially for
Africa, where a higher percentage of candidates is disqualified than in
Eurasia: which disqualifying factors are most important in Africa, and
what has selected for their high frequency in African mammals? Quantita
tive data should also be assembled to test my preliminary calculations sug
gesting differing rates of diffusion along the major axes of Eurasia, the
Americas, and Africa.
A SECOND EXTENSION will be to smaller geographic scales and shorter
time scales than those of this book. For instance, the following obvious
question has probably occurred to readers already: why, within Eurasia,
were European societies, rather than those of the Fertile Crescent or China
or India, the ones that colonized America and Australia, took the lead
in technology, and became politically and economically dominant in the
modern world? A historian who had lived at any time between 8500 B.C.
and A.D. 1450, and who had tried then to predict future historical trajecto
ries, would surely have labeled Europe's eventual dominance as the least
likely outcome, because Europe was the most backward of those three Old
World regions for most of those 10,000 years. From 8500 B.c. until the
rise of Greece and then Italy after 500 B.C., almost all major innovations
in western Eurasia—animal domestication, plant domestication, writing,
metallurgy, wheels, states, and so on—arose in or near the Fertile Crescent.
Until the proliferation of water mills after about A.D. 900, Europe west or
north of the Alps contributed nothing of significance to Old World tech
nology or civilization; it was instead a recipient of developments from the
eastern Mediterranean, Fertile Crescent, and China. Even from A.D. 1000
to 1450 the flow of science and technology was predominantly into