HOW CHINA BECAME CHINESE • 325
Especially fragmented is the distribution of the Miao-Yao (alias
Hmong-Mien) family, which consists of 6 million speakers divided among
about five languages, bearing the colorful names of Red Miao, White Miao
(alias Striped Miao), Black Miao, Green Miao (alias Blue Miao), and Yao.
Miao-Yao speakers live in dozens of small enclaves, all surrounded by
speakers of other language families and scattered over an area of half a
million square miles, extending from South China to Thailand. More than
100,000 Miao-speaking refugees from Vietnam have carried this language
family to the United States, where they are better known under the alterna
tive name of Hmong.
Another fragmented language group is the Austroasiatic family, whose
most widely spoken languages are Vietnamese and Cambodian. The 60
million Austroasiatic speakers are scattered from Vietnam in the east to
the Malay Peninsula in the south and to northern India in the west. The
fourth and last of China's language families is the Tai-Kadai family
(including Thai and Lao), whose 50 million speakers are distributed from
South China southward into Peninsular Thailand and west to Myanmar
(Figure 16.1).
Naturally, Miao-Yao speakers did not acquire their current fragmented
distribution as a result of ancient helicopter flights that dropped them here
and there over the Asian landscape. Instead, one might guess that they
once had a more nearly continuous distribution, which became frag
mented as speakers of other language families expanded or induced Miao-
Yao speakers to abandon their tongues. In fact, much of that process of
linguistic fragmentation occurred within the past 2,500 years and is well
documented historically. The ancestors of modern speakers of Thai, Lao,
and Burmese all moved south from South China and adjacent areas to
their present locations within historical times, successively inundating the
settled descendants of previous migrations. Speakers of Chinese languages
were especially vigorous in replacing and linguistically converting other
ethnic groups, whom Chinese speakers looked down upon as primitive
and inferior. The recorded history of China's Zhou Dynasty, from 1100 to
221 B.c., describes the conquest and absorption of most of China's non-
Chinese-speaking population by Chinese-speaking states.
We can use several types of reasoning to try to reconstruct the linguistic
map of East Asia as of several thousand years ago. First, we can reverse
the historically known linguistic expansions of recent millennia. Second,
we can reason that modern areas with just a single language or related