254 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Thus, it is untrue that there are continents whose societies have tended
to be innovative and continents whose societies have tended to be conser
vative. On any continent, at any given time, there are innovative societies
and also conservative ones. In addition, receptivity to innovation fluctu
ates in time within the same region.
On reflection, these conclusions are precisely what one would expect
if a society's innovativeness is determined by many independent factors.
Without a detailed knowledge of all of those factors, innovativeness
becomes unpredictable. Hence social scientists continue to debate the spe
cific reasons why receptivity changed in Islam, China, and Europe, and
why the Chimbus, Ibos, and Navajo were more receptive to new technol
ogy than were their neighbors. To the student of broad historical patterns,
though, it makes no difference what the specific reasons were in each of
those cases. The myriad factors affecting innovativeness make the histori
an's task paradoxically easier, by converting societal variation in innova
tiveness into essentially a random variable. That means that, over a large
enough area (such as a whole continent) at any particular time, some pro
portion of societies is likely to be innovative.
WHERE DO INNOVATIONS actually come from? For all societies except
the few past ones that were completely isolated, much or most new tech
nology is not invented locally but is instead borrowed from other societies.
The relative importance of local invention and of borrowing depends
mainly on two factors: the ease of invention of the particular technology,
and the proximity of the particular society to other societies.
Some inventions arose straightforwardly from a handling of natural
raw materials. Such inventions developed on many independent occasions
in world history, at different places and times. One example, which we
have already considered at length, is plant domestication, with at least
nine independent origins. Another is pottery, which may have arisen from
observations of the behavior of clay, a very widespread natural material,
when dried or heated. Pottery appeared in Japan around 14,000 years ago,
in the Fertile Crescent and China by around 10,000 years ago, and in
Amazonia, Africa's Sahel zone, the U.S. Southeast, and Mexico thereafter.
An example of a much more difficult invention is writing, which does
not suggest itself by observation of any natural material. As we saw in
Chapter 12, it had only a few independent origins, and the alphabet arose