I 8 6 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
by means of grafting techniques that had developed in China and spread
westward from there.
While Eurasia provides the world's widest band of land at the same
latitude, and hence the most dramatic example of rapid spread of domesti
cates, there are other examples as well. Rivaling in speed the spread of the
Fertile Crescent package was the eastward spread of a subtropical package
that was initially assembled in South China and that received additions
on reaching tropical Southeast Asia, the Philippines, Indonesia, and New
Guinea. Within 1,600 years that resulting package of crops (including
bananas, taro, and yams) and domestic animals (chickens, pigs, and dogs)
had spread more than 5,000 miles eastward into the tropical Pacific to
reach the islands of Polynesia. A further likely example is the east-west
spread of crops within Africa's wide Sahel zone, but paleobotanists have
yet to work out the details.
CONTRAST THE EASE of east-west diffusion in Eurasia with the diffi
culties of diffusion along Africa's north-south axis. Most of the Fertile
Crescent founder crops reached Egypt very quickly and then spread as far
south as the cool highlands of Ethiopia, beyond which they didn't spread.
South Africa's Mediterranean climate would have been ideal for them, but
the 2,000 miles of tropical conditions between Ethiopia and South Africa
posed an insuperable barrier. Instead, African agriculture south of the
Sahara was launched by the domestication of wild plants (such as sorghum
and African yams) indigenous to the Sahel zone and to tropical West
Africa, and adapted to the warm temperatures, summer rains, and rela
tively constant day lengths of those low latitudes.
Similarly, the spread southward of Fertile Crescent domestic animals
through Africa was stopped or slowed by climate and disease, especially
by trypanosome diseases carried by tsetse flies. The horse never became
established farther south than West Africa's kingdoms north of the equa
tor. The advance of cattle, sheep, and goats halted for 2,000 years at the
northern edge of the Serengeti Plains, while new types of human econo
mies and livestock breeds were being developed. Not until the period A.D.
1-200, some 8,000 years after livestock were domesticated in the Fertile
Crescent, did cattle, sheep, and goats finally reach South Africa. Tropical
African crops had their own difficulties spreading south in Africa, arriving
in South Africa with black African farmers (the Bantu) just after those