1O • PREFACE
groups. Some of them already are, and others are becoming, among the
world's most powerful economies and political forces.
Second, even for people specifically interested in the shaping of the
modern world, a history limited to developments since the emergence of
writing cannot provide deep understanding. It is not the case that societies
on the different continents were comparable to each other until 3,000 B.C.,
whereupon western Eurasian societies suddenly developed writing and
began for the first time to pull ahead in other respects as well. Instead,
already by 3,000 B.C., there were Eurasian and North African societies not
only with incipient writing but also with centralized state governments,
cities, widespread use of metal tools and weapons, use of domesticated
animals for transport and traction and mechanical power, and reliance on
agriculture and domestic animals for food. Throughout most or all parts
of other continents, none of those things existed at that time; some but not
all of them emerged later in parts of the Native Americas and sub-Saharan
Africa, but only over the course of the next five millennia; and none of
them emerged in Aboriginal Australia. That should already warn us that
the roots of western Eurasian dominance in the modern world lie in the
preliterate past before 3,000 B.C. (By western Eurasian dominance, I mean
the dominance of western Eurasian societies themselves and of the socie
ties that they spawned on other continents.)
Third, a history focused on western Eurasian societies completely
bypasses the obvious big question. Why were those societies the ones that
became disproportionately powerful and innovative? The usual answers
to that question invoke proximate forces, such as the rise of capitalism,
mercantilism, scientific inquiry, technology, and nasty germs that killed
peoples of other continents when they came into contact with western Eur
asians. But why did all those ingredients of conquest arise in western
Eurasia, and arise elsewhere only to a lesser degree or not at all?
All those ingredients are just proximate factors, not ultimate explana
tions. Why didn't capitalism flourish in Native Mexico, mercantilism in
sub-Saharan Africa, scientific inquiry in China, advanced technology in
Native North America, and nasty germs in Aboriginal Australia? If one
responds by invoking idiosyncratic cultural factors—e.g., scientific inquiry
supposedly stifled in China by Confucianism but stimulated in western
Eurasia by Greek or Judaeo-Christian traditions—then one is continuing
to ignore the need for ultimate explanations: why didn't traditions like
Confucianism and the Judaeo-Christian ethic instead develop in western