7 6 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
dozen years of the initial conquest, Incas mounted two desperate, large-
scale, well-prepared rebellions against the Spaniards. All those efforts
failed because of the Spaniards' far superior armament.
By the 1700s, guns had replaced swords as the main weapon favoring
European invaders over Native Americans and other native peoples. For
example, in 1808 a British sailor named Charlie Savage equipped with
muskets and excellent aim arrived in the Fiji Islands. The aptly named
Savage proceeded single-handedly to upset Fiji's balance of power. Among
his many exploits, he paddled his canoe up a river to the Fijian village of
Kasavu, halted less than a pistol shot's length from the village fence, and
fired away at the undefended inhabitants. His victims were so numerous
that surviving villagers piled up the bodies to take shelter behind them,
and the stream beside the village was red with blood. Such examples of
the power of guns against native peoples lacking guns could be multiplied
indefinitely.
In the Spanish conquest of the Incas, guns played only a minor role.
The guns of those times (so-called harquebuses) were difficult to load and
fire, and Pizarro had only a dozen of them. They did produce a big psycho
logical effect on those occasions when they managed to fire. Far more
important were the Spaniards' steel swords, lances, and daggers, strong
sharp weapons that slaughtered thinly armored Indians. In contrast,
Indian blunt clubs, while capable of battering and wounding Spaniards
and their horses, rarely succeeded in killing them. The Spaniards' steel or
chain mail armor and, above all, their steel helmets usually provided an
effective defense against club blows, while the Indians' quilted armor
offered no protection against steel weapons.
The tremendous advantage that the Spaniards gained from their horses
leaps out of the eyewitness accounts. Horsemen could easily outride Indian
sentries before the sentries had time to warn Indian troops behind them,
and could ride down and kill Indians on foot. The shock of a horse's
charge, its maneuverability, the speed of attack that it permitted, and the
raised and protected fighting platform that it provided left foot soldiers
nearly helpless in the open. Nor was the effect of horses due only to the
terror that they inspired in soldiers fighting against them for the first time.
By the time of the great Inca rebellion of 1536, the Incas had learned how
best to defend themselves against cavalry, by ambushing and annihilating
Spanish horsemen in narrow passes. But the Incas, like all other foot sol
diers, were never able to defeat cavalry in the open. When Quizo Yupan-