150 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
to their crop larder, as is shown by their exuberant adoption of the sweet
potato when it arrived. That same lesson is being driven home again in
New Guinea today, as those tribes with preferential access to introduced
new crops and livestock (or with the cultural willingness to adopt them)
expand at the expense of tribes without that access or willingness. Thus,
the limits on indigenous food production in New Guinea had nothing to
do with New Guinea peoples, and everything with the New Guinea biota
and environment.
OUR OTHER EXAMPLE of indigenous agriculture apparently con
strained by the local flora comes from the eastern United States. Like New
Guinea, that area supported independent domestication of local wild
plants. However, early developments are much better understood for the
eastern United States than for New Guinea: the crops grown by the earliest
farmers have been identified, and the dates and crop sequences of local
domestication are known. Well before other crops began to arrive from
elsewhere, Native Americans settled in eastern U.S. river valleys and devel
oped intensified food production based on local crops. Hence they were in
a position to take advantage of the most promising wild plants. Which
ones did they actually cultivate, and how did the resulting local crop pack
age compare with the Fertile Crescent's founder package?
It turns out that the eastern U.S. founder crops were four plants domes
ticated in the period 2500-1500 B.C., a full 6,000 years after wheat and
barley domestication in the Fertile Crescent. A local species of squash pro
vided small containers, as well as yielding edible seeds. The remaining
three founders were grown solely for their edible seeds (sunflower, a daisy
relative called sumpweed, and a distant relative of spinach called goose-
foot).
But four seed crops and a container fall far short of a complete food
production package. For 2,000 years those founder crops served only as
minor dietary supplements while eastern U.S. Native Americans continued
to depend mainly on wild foods, especially wild mammals and waterbirds,
fish, shellfish, and nuts. Farming did not supply a major part of their diet
until the period 500-200 B.c., after three more seed crops (knotweed,
maygrass, and little barley) had been brought into cultivation.
A modern nutritionist would have applauded those seven eastern U.S.