200 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
microbes. Yes, an untreated cholera patient may eventually die from pro
ducing diarrheal fluid at a rate of several gallons per day. At least for a
while, though, as long as the patient is still alive, the cholera bacterium
profits from being massively broadcast into the water supplies of its next
victims. Provided that each victim thereby infects on the average more
than one new victim, the bacterium will spread, even though the first host
happens to die.
So MUCH FOR our dispassionate examination of the germ's interests.
Now let's get back to considering our own selfish interests: to stay alive
and healthy, best done by killing the damned germs. One common
response of ours to infection is to develop a fever. Again, we're used to
considering fever as a "symptom of disease," as if it developed inevitably
without serving any function. But regulation of body temperature is under
our genetic control and doesn't just happen by accident. A few microbes
are more sensitive to heat than our own bodies are. By raising our body
temperature, we in effect try to bake the germs to death before we get
baked ourselves.
Another common response of ours is to mobilize our immune system.
White blood cells and other cells of ours actively seek out and kill foreign
microbes. The specific antibodies that we gradually build up against a par
ticular microbe infecting us make us less likely to get reinfected once we
become cured. As we all know from experience, there are some illnesses,
such as flu and the common cold, to which our resistance is only tempo
rary; we can eventually contract the illness again. Against other illnesses,
though—including measles, mumps, rubella, pertussis, and the now
defeated smallpox—our antibodies stimulated by one infection confer life
long immunity. That's the principle of vaccination: to stimulate our anti
body production without our having to go through the actual experience
of the disease, by inoculating us with a dead or weakened strain of
microbe.
Alas, some clever microbes don't just cave in to our immune defenses.
Some have learned to trick us by changing those molecular pieces of the
microbe (its so-called antigens) that our antibodies recognize. The con
stant evolution or recycling of new strains of flu, with differing antigens,
explains why your having gotten flu two years ago didn't protect you