ZEBRAS AND UNHAPPY MARRIAGES • 171
rearing grizzly cubs as part of a ritual. For understandable reasons,
though, the Ainu found it prudent to kill and eat the cubs at the age of one
year. Keeping grizzly bears for longer would be suicidal; I am not aware
of any adult that has been tamed.
Another otherwise suitable candidate that disqualifies itself for equally
obvious reasons is the African buffalo. It grows quickly up to a weight of
a ton and lives in herds that have a well-developed dominance hierarchy,
a trait whose virtues will be discussed below. But the African buffalo is
considered the most dangerous and unpredictable large mammal of Africa.
Anyone insane enough to try to domesticate it either died in the effort or
was forced to kill the buffalo before it got too big and nasty. Similarly,
hippos, as four-ton vegetarians, would be great barnyard animals if they
weren't so dangerous. They kill more people each year than do any other
African mammals, including even lions.
Few people would be surprised at the disqualification of those notori
ously ferocious candidates. But there are other candidates whose dangers
are not so well known. For instance, the eight species of wild equids
(horses and their relatives) vary greatly in disposition, even though all
eight are genetically so close to each other that they will interbreed and
produce healthy (though usually sterile) offspring. Two of them, the horse
and the North African ass (ancestor of the donkey), were successfully
domesticated. Closely related to the North African ass is the Asiatic ass,
also known as the onager. Since its homeland includes the Fertile Crescent,
the cradle of Western civilization and animal domestication, ancient peo
ples must have experimented extensively with onagers. We know from
Sumerian and later depictions that onagers were regularly hunted, as well
as captured and hybridized with donkeys and horses. Some ancient depic
tions of horselike animals used for riding or for pulling carts may refer
to onagers. However, all writers about them, from Romans to modern
zookeepers, decry their irascible temper and their nasty habit of biting
people. As a result, although similar in other respects to ancestral donkeys,
onagers have never been domesticated.
Africa's four species of zebras are even worse. Efforts at domestication
went as far as hitching them to carts: they were tried out as draft animals
in 19th-century South Africa, and the eccentric Lord Walter Rothschild
drove through the streets of London in a carriage pulled by zebras. Alas,
zebras become impossibly dangerous as they grow older. (That's not to
deny that many individual horses are also nasty, but zebras and onagers