THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE • 4 23
to emergent changes at a higher level. A typical example is the effect of
that one truck driver's braking response, in Hitler's nearly fatal traffic acci
dent of 1930, on the lives of a hundred million people who were killed or
wounded in World War II. Although most biologists agree that biological
systems are in the end wholly determined by their physical properties and
obey the laws of quantum mechanics, the systems' complexity means, for
practical purposes, that that deterministic causation does not translate into
predictability. Knowledge of quantum mechanics does not help one under
stand why introduced placental predators have exterminated so many Aus
tralian marsupial species, or why the Allied Powers rather than the Central
Powers won World War I.
Each glacier, nebula, hurricane, human society, and biological species,
and even each individual and cell of a sexually reproducing species, is
unique, because it is influenced by so many variables and made up of so
many variable parts. In contrast, for any of the physicist's elementary par
ticles and isotopes and of the chemist's molecules, all individuals of the
entity are identical to each other. Hence physicists and chemists can for
mulate universal deterministic laws at the macroscopic level, but biologists
and historians can formulate only statistical trends. With a very high prob
ability of being correct, I can predict that, of the next 1,000 babies born
at the University of California Medical Center, where I work, not fewer
than 480 or more than 520 will be boys. But I had no means of knowing
in advance that my own two children would be boys. Similarly, historians
note that tribal societies may have been more likely to develop into chief
doms if the local population was sufficiently large and dense and if there
was potential for surplus food production than if that was not the case.
But each such local population has its own unique features, with the result
that chiefdoms did emerge in the highlands of Mexico, Guatemala, Peru,
and Madagascar, but not in those of New Guinea or Guadalcanal.
Still another way of describing the complexity and unpredictability of
historical systems, despite their ultimate determinacy, is to note that long
chains of causation may separate final effects from ultimate causes lying
outside the domain of that field of science. For example, the dinosaurs
may have been exterminated by the impact of an asteroid whose orbit was
completely determined by the laws of classical mechanics. But if there had
been any paleontologists living 67 million years ago, they could not have
predicted the dinosaurs' imminent demise, because asteroids belong to a
field of science otherwise remote from dinosaur biology. Similarly, the Lit-