NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 43
ipated purposes. It may come as a surprise to learn that these inventions
in search of a use include most of the major technological breakthroughs
of modern times, ranging from the airplane and automobile, through the
internal combustion engine and electric light bulb, to the phonograph and
transistor. Thus, invention is often the mother of necessity, rather than
vice versa.
A good example is the history of Thomas Edison's phonograph, the
most original invention of the greatest inventor of modern times. When
Edison built his first phonograph in 1877, he published an article propos
ing ten uses to which his invention might be put. They included preserving
the last words of dying people, recording books for blind people to hear,
announcing clock time, and teaching spelling. Reproduction of music was
not high on Edison's list of priorities. A few years later Edison told his
assistant that his invention had no commercial value. Within another few
years he changed his mind and did enter business to sell phonographs—
but for use as office dictating machines. When other entrepreneurs created
jukeboxes by arranging for a phonograph to play popular music at the
drop of a coin, Edison objected to this debasement, which apparently
detracted from serious office use of his invention. Only after about 20
years did Edison reluctantly concede that the main use of his phonograph
was to record and play music.
The motor vehicle is another invention whose uses seem obvious today.
However, it was not invented in response to any demand. When Nikolaus
Otto built his first gas engine, in 1866, horses had been supplying people's
land transportation needs for nearly 6,000 years, supplemented increas
ingly by steam-powered railroads for several decades. There was no crisis
in the availability of horses, no dissatisfaction with railroads.
Because Otto's engine was weak, heavy, and seven feet tall, it did not
recommend itself over horses. Not until 1885 did engines improve to the
point that Gottfried Daimler got around to installing one on a bicycle to
create the first motorcycle; he waited until 1896 to build the first truck.
In 1905, motor vehicles were still expensive, unreliable toys for the rich.
Public contentment with horses and railroads remained high until World
War I, when the military concluded that it really did need trucks. Intensive
postwar lobbying by truck manufacturers and armies finally convinced the
public of its own needs and enabled trucks to begin to supplant horse-
drawn wagons in industrialized countries. Even in the largest American
cities, the changeover took 50 years.