HOW AFRICA BECAME BLACK • 3 77
past and establish a multiracial society. Namibia illustrated for me how
inseparable Africa's past is from its present.
Most Americans and many Europeans equate native Africans with
blacks, white Africans with recent intruders, and African racial history
with the story of European colonialism and slave trading. There is an obvi
ous reason why we focus on those particular facts: blacks are the sole
native Africans familiar to most Americans, because they were brought in
large numbers as slaves to the United States. But very different peoples
may have occupied much of modern black Africa until as recently as a few
thousand years ago, and so-called African blacks themselves are heteroge
neous. Even before the arrival of white colonialists, Africa already har
bored not just blacks but (as we shall see) five of the world's six major
divisions of humanity, and three of them are confined as natives to Africa.
One-quarter of the world's languages are spoken only in Africa. No other
continent approaches this human diversity.
Africa's diverse peoples resulted from its diverse geography and its long
prehistory. Africa is the only continent to extend from the northern to the
southern temperate zone, while also encompassing some of the world's
driest deserts, largest tropical rain forests, and highest equatorial moun
tains. Humans have lived in Africa far longer than anywhere else: our
remote ancestors originated there around 7 million years ago, and anatom
ically modern Homo sapiens may have arisen there since then. The long
interactions between Africa's many peoples generated its fascinating pre
history, including two of the most dramatic population movements of the
past 5,000 years—the Bantu expansion and the Indonesian colonization
of Madagascar. All of those past interactions continue to have heavy con
sequences, because the details of who arrived where before whom are
shaping Africa today.
How did those five divisions of humanity get to be where they are now
in Africa? Why were blacks the ones who came to be so widespread, rather
than the four other groups whose existence Americans tend to forget?
How can we ever hope to wrest the answers to those questions from Afri
ca's preliterate past, lacking the written evidence that teaches us about the
spread of the Roman Empire? African prehistory is a puzzle on a grand
scale, still only partly solved. As it turns out, the story has some little-
appreciated but striking parallels with the American prehistory that we
encountered in the preceding chapter.