230 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
and other writing materials, the idea of a writing system, the idea of using
separate marks, and the forms of several dozen marks. Since, however, he
could neither read nor write English, he acquired no details or even princi
ples from the existing scripts around him. Surrounded by alphabets he
could not understand, he instead independently reinvented a syllabary,
unaware that the Minoans of Crete had already invented another syllabary
3,500 years previously.
SEQUOYAH'S EXAMPLE CAN serve as a model for how idea diffusion
probably led to many writing systems of ancient times as well. The han'gul
alphabet devised by Korea's King Sejong in A.D. 1446 for the Korean lan
guage was evidently inspired by the block format of Chinese characters
and by the alphabetic principle of Mongol or Tibetan Buddhist writing.
However, King Sejong invented the forms of han'gul letters and several
unique features of his alphabet, including the grouping of letters by sylla
bles into square blocks, the use of related letter shapes to represent related
vowel or consonant sounds, and shapes of consonant letters that depict
the position in which the lips or tongue are held to pronounce that conso
nant. The ogham alphabet used in Ireland and parts of Celtic Britain from
around the fourth century A.D. similarly adopted the alphabetic principle
(in this case, from existing European alphabets) but again devised unique
letter forms, apparently based on a five-finger system of hand signals.
We can confidently attribute the han'gul and ogham alphabets to idea
diffusion rather than to independent invention in isolation, because we
know that both societies were in close contact with societies possessing
writing and because it is clear which foreign scripts furnished the inspira-
tion. In contrast, we can confidently attribute Sumerian cuneiform and the
earliest Mesoamerican writing to independent invention, because at the
times of their first appearances there existed no other script in their respec
tive hemispheres that could have inspired them. Still debatable are the ori
gins of writing on Easter Island, in China, and in Egypt.
The Polynesians living on Easter Island, in the Pacific Ocean, had a
unique script of which the earliest preserved examples date back only to
about A.D. 1851, long after Europeans reached Easter in 1722. Perhaps
writing arose independently on Easter before the arrival of Europeans,
although no examples have survived. But the most straightforward inter
pretation is to take the facts at face value, and to assume that Easter