THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE • 4 25
human societies by comparing recent Polynesian populations living on
islands differing naturally in resource abundance. The student of human
history can draw on many more natural experiments than just compari
sons among the five inhabited continents. Comparisons can also utilize
large islands that have developed complex societies in a considerable
degree of isolation (such as Japan, Madagascar, Native American Hispan¬
iola, New Guinea, Hawaii, and many others), as well as societies on hun
dreds of smaller islands and regional societies within each of the
continents.
Natural experiments in any field, whether in ecology or human history,
are inherently open to potential methodological criticisms. Those include
confounding effects of natural variation in additional variables besides the
one of interest, as well as problems in inferring chains of causation from
observed correlations between variables. Such methodological problems
have been discussed in great detail for some of the historical sciences. In
particular, epidemiology, the science of drawing inferences about human
diseases by comparing groups of people (often by retrospective historical
studies), has for a long time successfully employed formalized procedures
for dealing with problems similar to those facing historians of human soci
eties. Ecologists have also devoted much attention to the problems of natu
ral experiments, a methodology to which they must resort in many cases
where direct experimental interventions to manipulate relevant ecological
variables would be immoral, illegal, or impossible. Evolutionary biologists
have recently been developing ever more sophisticated methods for draw
ing conclusions from comparisons of different plants and animals of
known evolutionary histories.
In short, I acknowledge that it is much more difficult to understand
human history than to understand problems in fields of science where his
tory is unimportant and where fewer individual variables operate. Never
theless, successful methodologies for analyzing historical problems have
been worked out in several fields. As a result, the histories of dinosaurs,
nebulas, and glaciers are generally acknowledged to belong to fields of
science rather than to the humanities. But introspection gives us far more
insight into the ways of other humans than into those of dinosaurs. I am
thus optimistic that historical studies of human societies can be pursued as
scientifically as studies of dinosaurs—and with profit to our own society
today, by teaching us what shaped the modern world, and what might
shape our future.