A NATURAL EXPERIMENT OF HISTORY • 6 X
Other islands had rich soils but were not high enough to have large
permanent streams and hence irrigation. Inhabitants of those islands devel
oped intensive dryland agriculture requiring a heavy input of labor to
build terraces, carry out mulching, rotate crops, reduce or eliminate fallow
periods, and maintain tree plantations. Dryland agriculture became espe
cially productive on Easter, tiny Anuta, and flat and low Tonga, where
Polynesians devoted most of the land area to the growing of food.
The most productive Polynesian agriculture was taro cultivation in irri
gated fields. Among the more populous tropical islands, that option was
ruled out for Tonga by its low elevation and hence its lack of rivers. Irriga
tion agriculture reached its peak on the westernmost Hawaiian islands of
Kauai, Oahu, and Molokai, which were big and wet enough to support
not only large permanent streams but also large human populations avail
able for construction projects. Hawaiian labor corvees built elaborate irri
gation systems for taro fields yielding up to 24 tons per acre, the highest
crop yields in all of Polynesia. Those yields in turn supported intensive pig
production. Hawaii was also unique within Polynesia in using mass labor
for aquaculture, by constructing large fishponds in which milkfish and
mullet were grown.
As A RESULT of all this environmentally related variation in subsistence,
human population densities (measured in people per square mile of arable
land) varied greatly over Polynesia. At the lower end were the hunter-
gatherers of the Chathams (only 5 people per square mile) and of New
Zealand's South Island, and the farmers of the rest of New Zealand (28
people per square mile). In contrast, many islands with intensive agricul
ture attained population densities exceeding 120 per square mile. Tonga,
Samoa, and the Societies achieved 210-250 people per square mile and
Hawaii 300. The upper extreme of 1,100 people per square mile was
reached on the high island of Anuta, whose population converted essen
tially all the land to intensive food production, thereby crammed 160 peo
ple into the island's 100 acres, and joined the ranks of the densest self-
sufficient populations in the world. Anuta's population density exceeded
that of modern Holland and even rivaled that of Bangladesh.
Population size is the product of population density (people per square
mile) and area (square miles). The relevant area is not the area of an island
but that of a political unit, which could be either larger or smaller than a