30 • PROLOGUE
(Chapter 12). Writing has evolved de novo only a few times in human
history, in areas that had been the earliest sites of the rise of food produc
tion in their respective regions. All other societies that have become literate
did so by the diffusion of writing systems or of the idea of writing from
one of those few primary centers. Hence, for the student of world history,
the phenomenon of writing is particularly useful for exploring another
important constellation of causes: geography's effect on the ease with
which ideas and inventions spread.
What holds for writing also holds for technology (Chapter 13). A cru
cial question is whether technological innovation is so dependent on rare
inventor-geniuses, and on many idiosyncratic cultural factors, as to defy
an understanding of world patterns. In fact, we shall see that, paradoxi
cally, this large number of cultural factors makes it easier, not harder, to
understand world patterns of technology. By enabling farmers to generate
food surpluses, food production permitted farming societies to support
full-time craft specialists who did not grow their own food and who devel
oped technologies.
Besides sustaining scribes and inventors, food production also enabled
farmers to support politicians (Chapter 14). Mobile bands of hunter-gath
erers are relatively egalitarian, and their political sphere is confined to the
band's own territory and to shifting alliances with neighboring bands.
With the rise of dense, sedentary, food-producing populations came the
rise of chiefs, kings, and bureaucrats. Such bureaucracies were essential
not only to governing large and populous domains but also to maintaining
standing armies, sending out fleets of exploration, and organizing wars of
conquest.
Part 4 ("Around the World in Five Chapters," Chapters 15-19) applies
the lessons of Parts 2 and 3 to each of the continents and some important
islands. Chapter 15 examines the history of Australia itself, and of the
large island of New Guinea, formerly joined to Australia in a single conti
nent. The case of Australia, home to the recent human societies with the
simplest technologies, and the sole continent where food production did
not develop indigenously, poses a critical test of theories about interconti
nental differences in human societies. We shall see why Aboriginal Austra
lians remained hunter-gatherers, even while most peoples of neighboring
New Guinea became food producers.
Chapters 16 and 17 integrate developments in Australia and New
Guinea into the perspective of the whole region encompassing the East