54 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
toms and we caught all the people. Not one escaped. Some ran away from
us, these we killed, and others we killed—but what of that? It was in accor
dance with our custom."
The brutal outcome of this collision between the Moriori and the Maori
could have been easily predicted. The Moriori were a small, isolated popu
lation of hunter-gatherers, equipped with only the simplest technology and
weapons, entirely inexperienced at war, and lacking strong leadership or
organization. The Maori invaders (from New Zealand's North Island)
came from a dense population of farmers chronically engaged in ferocious
wars, equipped with more-advanced technology and weapons, and
operating under strong leadership. Of course, when the two groups finally
came into contact, it was the Maori who slaughtered the Moriori, not vice
versa.
The tragedy of the Moriori resembles many other such tragedies in both
the modern and the ancient world, pitting numerous well-equipped people
against few ill-equipped opponents. What makes the Maori-Moriori colli
sion grimly illuminating is that both groups had diverged from a common
origin less than a millennium earlier. Both were Polynesian peoples. The
modern Maori are descendants of Polynesian farmers who colonized New
Zealand around A.D. 1000. Soon thereafter, a group of those Maori in
turn colonized the Chatham Islands and became the Moriori. In the centu
ries after the two groups separated, they evolved in opposite directions,
the North Island Maori developing more-complex and the Moriori less-
complex technology and political organization. The Moriori reverted to
being hunter-gatherers, while the North Island Maori turned to more
intensive farming.
Those opposite evolutionary courses sealed the outcome of their even
tual collision. If we could understand the reasons for the disparate devel
opment of those two island societies, we might have a model for
understanding the broader question of differing developments on the con
tinents.
MORIORI AND MAORI history constitutes a brief, small-scale natural
experiment that tests how environments affect human societies. Before you
read a whole book examining environmental effects on a very large scale—
effects on human societies around the world for the last 13,000 years—
you might reasonably want assurance, from smaller tests, that such effects