BLUEPRINTS AND BORROWED LETTERS • 225
your eventual specific solution may or may not resemble that of the first
inventor.
To take a recent example, historians are still debating whether blueprint
copying or idea diffusion contributed more to Russia's building of an
atomic bomb. Did Russia's bomb-building efforts depend critically on
blueprints of the already constructed American bomb, stolen and transmit
ted to Russia by spies? Or was it merely that the revelation of America's
A-bomb at Hiroshima at last convinced Stalin of the feasibility of building
such a bomb, and that Russian scientists then reinvented the principles in
an independent crash program, with little detailed guidance from the ear
lier American effort? Similar questions arise for the history of the develop
ment of wheels, pyramids, and gunpowder. Let's now examine how
blueprint copying and idea diffusion contributed to the spread of writing
systems.
TODAY, PROFESSIONAL LINGUISTS design writing systems for
unwritten languages by the method of blueprint copying. Most such tailor-
made systems modify existing alphabets, though some instead design sylla
baries. For example, missionary linguists are working on modified Roman
alphabets for hundreds of New Guinea and Native American languages.
Government linguists devised the modified Roman alphabet adopted in
1928 by Turkey for writing Turkish, as well as the modified Cyrillic alpha
bets designed for many tribal languages of Russia.
In a few cases, we also know something about the individuals who
designed writing systems by blueprint copying in the remote past. For
instance, the Cyrillic alphabet itself (the one still used today in Russia) is
descended from an adaptation of Greek and Hebrew letters devised by
Saint Cyril, a Greek missionary to the Slavs in the ninth century A.D. The
first preserved texts for any Germanic language (the language family that
includes English) are in the Gothic alphabet created by Bishop Ulfilas, a
missionary living with the Visigoths in what is now Bulgaria in the fourth
century A.D. Like Saint Cyril's invention, Ulfilas's alphabet was a mish-
\ mash of letters borrowed from different sources: about 20 Greek letters,
about five Roman letters, and two letters either taken from the runic
alphabet or invented by Ulfilas himself. Much more often, we know noth
ing about the individuals responsible for devising famous alphabets of the