NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 251
War I launched whole new fields of technology. But wars can also deal
devastating setbacks to technological development. (2) Strong centralized
government boosted technology in late-19th-century Germany and Japan,
and crushed it in China after A.D. 1500. (3) Many northern Europeans
assume that technology thrives in a rigorous climate where survival is
impossible without technology, and withers in a benign climate where
clothing is unnecessary and bananas supposedly fall off the trees. An oppo
site view is that benign environments leave people free from the constant
struggle for existence, free to devote themselves to innovation. (4) There
has also been debate over whether technology is stimulated by abundance
or by scarcity of environmental resources. Abundant resources might stim
ulate the development of inventions utilizing those resources, such as
water mill technology in rainy northern Europe, with its many rivers—but
why didn't water mill technology progress more rapidly in even rainier
New Guinea? The destruction of Britain's forests has been suggested as the
reason behind its early lead in developing coal technology, but why didn't
deforestation have the same effect in China?
This discussion does not exhaust the list of reasons proposed to explain
why societies differ in their receptivity to new technology. Worse yet, all
of these proximate explanations bypass the question of the ultimate fac
tors behind them. This may seem like a discouraging setback in our
attempt to understand the course of history, since technology has undoubt
edly been one of history's strongest forces. However, I shall now argue
that the diversity of independent factors behind technological innovation
actually makes it easier, not harder, to understand history's broad pattern.
FOR THE PURPOSES of this book, the key question about the laundry
list is whether such factors differed systematically from continent to conti
nent and thereby led to continental differences in technological develop
ment. Most laypeople and many historians assume, expressly or tacitly,
that the answer is yes. For example, it is widely believed that Australian
Aborigines as a group shared ideological characteristics contributing to
their technological backwardness: they were (or are) supposedly conserva
tive, living in an imagined past Dreamtime of the world's creation, and not
focused on practical ways to improve the present. A leading historian of
Africa characterized Africans as inward looking and lacking Europeans'
drive for expansion.