390 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
nists fed on wheat and cattle, we have to suspect that some of the "lucky"
Africans parlayed their advantage into engulfing their African neighbors.
Now, at last, let's turn to the archaeological record to find out who
engulfed whom when.
WHAT CAN ARCHAEOLOGY can tell us about actual dates and places
for the rise of farming and herding in Africa? Any reader steeped in the
history of Western civilization would be forgiven for assuming that African
food production began in ancient Egypt's Nile Valley, land of the pharaohs
and pyramids. After all, Egypt by 3000 B.C. was undoubtedly the site of
Africa's most complex society, and one of the world's earliest centers of
writing. In fact, though, possibly the earliest archaeological evidence for
food production in Africa comes instead from the Sahara.
Today, of course, much of the Sahara is so dry that it cannot support
even grass. But between about 9000 and 4000 B.C. the Sahara was more
humid, held numerous lakes, and teemed with game. In that period, Sahar¬
ans began to tend cattle and make pottery, then to keep sheep and goats,
and they may also have been starting to domesticate sorghum and millet.
Saharan pastoralism precedes the earliest known date (5200 B.C.) for the
arrival of food production in Egypt, in the form of a full package of South
west Asian winter crops and livestock. Food production also arose in West
Africa and Ethiopia, and by around 2500 B.C. cattle herders had already
crossed the modern border from Ethiopia into northern Kenya.
While those conclusions rest on archaeological evidence, there is also
an independent method for dating the arrival of domestic plants and ani
mals: by comparing the words for them in modern languages. Compari
sons of terms for plants in southern Nigerian languages of the Niger-
Congo family show that the words fall into three groups. First are cases in
which the word for a particular crop is very similar in all those southern
Nigerian languages. Those crops prove to be ones like West African yams,
oil palm, and kola nut—plants that were already believed on botanical
and other evidence to be native to West Africa and first domesticated there.
Since those are the oldest West African crops, all modern southern Nige
rian languages inherited the same original set of words for them.
Next come crops whose names are consistent only among the languages
falling within a small subgroup of those southern Nigerian languages.
Those crops turn out to be ones believed to be of Indonesian origin, such