SPEEDBOAT TO POLYNESIA • 3 43
sian sub-subfamily, which is in turn a fairly recent branch of the Malayo-
Polynesian subfamily. Those details of linguistic relationships agree per
fectly with the archaeological evidence that the colonization of the Malay
Peninsula was recent, and followed rather than preceded the colonization
of Taiwan, the Philippines, and Indonesia.
The other coincidence between archaeological and linguistic evidence
concerns the cultural baggage that ancient Austronesians used. Archaeol
ogy provides us with direct evidence of culture in the form of pottery, pig
and fish bones, and so on. One might initially wonder how a linguist,
studying only modern languages whose unwritten ancestral forms remain
unknown, could ever figure out whether Austronesians living on Taiwan
6,000 years ago had pigs. The solution is to reconstruct the vocabularies
of vanished ancient languages (so-called protolanguages) by comparing
vocabularies of modern languages derived from them.
For instance, the words meaning "sheep" in many languages of the
Indo-European language family, distributed from Ireland to India, are
quite similar: "avis," "avis," "ovis," "oveja," "ovtsa," "owis," and "oi"
in Lithuanian, Sanskrit, Latin, Spanish, Russian, Greek, and Irish, respec
tively. (The English "sheep" is obviously from a different root, but English
retains the original root in the word "ewe.") Comparison of the sound
shifts that the various modern Indo-European languages have undergone
during their histories suggests that the original form was "owis" in the
ancestral Indo-European language spoken around 6,000 years ago. That
unwritten ancestral language is termed Proto-Indo-European.
Evidently, Proto-Indo-Europeans 6,000 years ago had sheep, in
agreement with archaeological evidence. Nearly 2,000 other words of
their vocabulary can similarly be reconstructed, including words for
"goat," "horse," "wheel," "brother," and "eye." But no Proto-Indo-Euro
pean word can be reconstructed for "gun," which uses different roots in
different modern Indo-European languages: "gun" in English, "fusil" in
French, "ruzhyo" in Russian, and so on. That shouldn't surprise us: people
6,000 years ago couldn't possibly have had a word for guns, which were
invented only within the past 1,000 years. Since there was thus no inher
ited shared root meaning "gun," each Indo-European language had to
invent or borrow its own word when guns were finally invented.
Proceeding in the same way, we can compare modern Taiwanese, Philip
pine, Indonesian, and Polynesian languages to reconstruct a Proto-Aus-