ZEBRAS AND UNHAPPY MARRIAGES • 169
The answer follows from the Anna Karenina principle. To be domesti
cated, a candidate wild species must possess many different characteristics.
Lack of any single required characteristic dooms efforts at domestication,
just as it dooms efforts at building a happy marriage. Playing marriage
counselor to the zebra/human couple and other ill-sorted pairs, we can
recognize at least six groups of reasons for failed domestication.
Diet. Every time that an animal eats a plant or another animal, the
conversion of food biomass into the consumer's biomass involves an effi
ciency of much less than 100 percent: typically around 10 percent. That
is, it takes around 10,000 pounds of corn to grow a 1,000-pound cow. If
instead you want to grow 1,000 pounds of carnivore, you have to feed it
10,000 pounds of herbivore grown on 100,000 pounds of corn. Even
among herbivores and omnivores, many species, like koalas, are too fin
icky in their plant preferences to recommend themselves as farm animals.
As a result of this fundamental inefficiency, no mammalian carnivore
has ever been domesticated for food. (No, it's not because its meat would
be tough or tasteless: we eat carnivorous wild fish all the time, and I can
personally attest to the delicious flavor of lion burger.) The nearest thing to
an exception is the dog, originally domesticated as a sentinel and hunting
companion, but breeds of dogs were developed and raised for food in
Aztec Mexico, Polynesia, and ancient China. However, regular dog eating
has been a last resort of meat-deprived human societies: the Aztecs had no
other domestic mammal, and the Polynesians and ancient Chinese had
only pigs and dogs. Human societies blessed with domestic herbivorous
mammals have not bothered to eat dogs, except as an uncommon delicacy
(as in parts of Southeast Asia today). In addition, dogs are not strict carni
vores but omnivores: if you are so naive as to think that your beloved pet
dog is really a meat eater, just read the list of ingredients on your bag of
dog food. The dogs that the Aztecs and Polynesians reared for food were
efficiently fattened on vegetables and garbage.
Growth Rate. To be worth keeping, domesticates must also grow
quickly. That eliminates gorillas and elephants, even though they are vege
tarians with admirably nonfinicky food preferences and represent a lot of
meat. What would-be gorilla or elephant rancher would wait 15 years for
his herd to reach adult size? Modern Asians who want work elephants find
it much cheaper to capture them in the wild and tame them.
Problems of Captive Breeding. We humans don't like to have sex under
the watchful eyes of others; some potentially valuable animal species don't