284 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Mesoamerica and the Andes, irrigation systems always remained small-
scale ones that local communities could build and maintain themselves.
Thus, even in those areas where complex systems of hydraulic manage
ment did emerge, they were a secondary consequence of states that must
have formed for other reasons.
What seems to me to point to a fundamentally correct view of state
formation is an undoubted fact of much wider validity than the correlation
between irrigation and the formation of some states—namely, that the size
of the regional population is the strongest single predictor of societal com
plexity. As we have seen, bands number a few dozen individuals, tribes a
few hundred, chiefdoms a few thousand to a few tens of thousands, and
states generally over about 50,000. In addition to that coarse correlation
between regional population size and type of society (band, tribe, and so
on), there is a finer trend, within each of those categories, between popula
tion and societal complexity: for instance, that chiefdoms with large popu
lations prove to be the most centralized, stratified, and complex ones.
These correlations suggest strongly that regional population size or
population density or population pressure has something to do with the
formation of complex societies. But the correlations do not tell us precisely
how population variables function in a chain of cause and effect whose
outcome is a complex society. To trace out that chain, let us now remind
ourselves how large dense populations themselves arise. Then we can
examine why a large but simple society could not maintain itself. With
that as background, we shall finally return to the question of how a sim
pler society actually becomes more complex as the regional population
increases.
WE HAVE SEEN that large or dense populations arise only under condi
tions of food production, or at least under exceptionally productive condi
tions for hunting-gathering. Some productive hunter-gatherer societies
reached the organizational level of chiefdoms, but none reached the level
of states: all states nourish their citizens by food production. These consid
erations, along with the just mentioned correlation between regional pop
ulation size and societal complexity, have led to a protracted chicken-or-
egg debate about the causal relations between food production, popula
tion variables, and societal complexity. Is it intensive food production that
is the cause, triggering population growth and somehow leading to a com-