182 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Of course, not all pieces of the package spread to all those outlying
areas: for example, Egypt was too warm for einkorn wheat to become
established. In some outlying areas, elements of the package arrived at
different times: for instance, sheep preceded cereals in southwestern
Europe. Some outlying areas went on to domesticate a few local crops of
their own, such as poppies in western Europe and watermelons possibly
in Egypt. But most food production in outlying areas depended initially
on Fertile Crescent domesticates. Their spread was soon followed by that
of other innovations originating in or near the Fertile Crescent, including
the wheel, writing, metalworking techniques, milking, fruit trees, and beer
and wine production.
Why did the same plant package launch food production throughout
western Eurasia? Was it because the same set of plants occurred in the wild
in many areas, were found useful there just as in the Fertile Crescent, and
were independently domesticated? No, that's not the reason. First, many
of the Fertile Crescent's founder crops don't even occur in the wild outside
Southwest Asia. For instance, none of the eight main founder crops except
barley grows wild in Egypt. Egypt's Nile Valley provides an environment
similar to the Fertile Crescent's Tigris and Euphrates Valleys. Hence the
package that worked well in the latter valleys also worked well enough
in the Nile Valley to trigger the spectacular rise of indigenous Egyptian
civilization. But the foods to fuel that spectacular rise were originally
absent in Egypt. The sphinx and pyramids were built by people fed on
crops originally native to the Fertile Crescent, not to Egypt.
Second, even for those crops whose wild ancestor does occur outside of
Southwest Asia, we can be confident that the crops of Europe and India
were mostly obtained from Southwest Asia and were not local domesti
cates. For example, wild flax occurs west to Britain and Algeria and east
to the Caspian Sea, while wild barley occurs east even to Tibet. However,
for most of the Fertile Crescent's founding crops, all cultivated varieties in
the world today share only one arrangement of chromosomes out of the
multiple arrangements found in the wild ancestor; or else they share only
a single mutation (out of many possible mutations) by which the cultivated
varieties differ from the wild ancestor in characteristics desirable to
humans. For instance, all cultivated peas share the same recessive gene that
prevents ripe pods of cultivated peas from spontaneously popping open
and spilling their peas, as wild pea pods do.
Evidently, most of the Fertile Crescent's founder crops were never