50 GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
habitable continents, North America and South America are the ones with
the shortest human prehistories.
W I TH THE OCCUPATION of the Americas, most habitable areas of the
continents and continental islands, plus oceanic islands from Indonesia to
east of New Guinea, supported humans. The settlement of the world's
remaining islands was not completed until modern times: Mediterranean
islands such as Crete, Cyprus, Corsica, and Sardinia between about 8500
and 4000 B.C.; Caribbean islands beginning around 4000 B.C.; Polynesian
and Micronesian islands between 1200 B.C. and A.D. 1000; Madagascar
sometime between A.D. 300 and 800; and Iceland in the ninth century A.D.
Native Americans, possibly ancestral to the modern Inuit, spread through
out the High Arctic around 2000 B.C. That left, as the sole uninhabited
areas awaiting European explorers over the last 700 years, only the most
remote islands of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans (such as the Azores and
Seychelles), plus Antarctica.
What significance, if any, do the continents' differing dates of settlement
have for subsequent history? Suppose that a time machine could have
transported an archaeologist back in time, for a world tour at around
11,000 B.C. Given the state of the world then, could the archaeologist have
predicted the sequence in which human societies on the various continents
would develop guns, germs, and steel, and thus predicted the state of the
world today?
Our archaeologist might have considered the possible advantages of a
head start. If that counted for anything, then Africa enjoyed an enormous
advantage: at least 5 million more years of separate protohuman existence
than on any other continent. In addition, if it is true that modern humans
arose in Africa around 100,000 years ago and spread to other continents,
that would have wiped out any advantages accumulated elsewhere in the
meantime and given Africans a new head start. Furthermore, human
genetic diversity is highest in Africa; perhaps more-diverse humans would
collectively produce more-diverse inventions.
But our archaeologist might then reflect: what, really, does a "head
start" mean for the purposes of this book? We cannot take the metaphor
of a footrace literally. If by head start you mean the time required to popu
late a continent after the arrival of the first few pioneering colonists, that
time is relatively brief: for example, less than 1,000 years to fill up even