282 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
that my New Guinea friends have given me of their former tribal wars,
there has been not a single hint of tribal patriotism, of a suicidal charge,
or of any other military conduct carrying an accepted risk of being killed.
Instead, raids are initiated by ambush or by superior force, so as to mini
mize at all costs the risk that one might die for one's village. But that
attitude severely limits the military options of tribes, compared with state
societies. Naturally, what makes patriotic and religious fanatics such dan
gerous opponents is not the deaths of the fanatics themselves, but their
willingness to accept the deaths of a fraction of their number in order to
annihilate or crush their infidel enemy. Fanaticism in war, of the type that
drove recorded Christian and Islamic conquests, was probably unknown
on Earth until chiefdoms and especially states emerged within the last
6,000 years.
How DID SMALL, noncentralized, kin-based societies evolve into large
centralized ones in which most members are not closely related to each
other? Having reviewed the stages in this transformation from bands to
states, we now ask what impelled societies thus to transform themselves.
At many moments in history, states have arisen independently—or, as
cultural anthropologists say, "pristinely," that is, in the absence of any
preexisting surrounding states. Pristine state origins took place at least
once, possibly many times, on each of the continents except Australia and
North America. Prehistoric states included those of Mesopotamia, North
China, the Nile and Indus Valleys, Mesoamerica, the Andes, and West
Africa. Native states in contact with European states have arisen from
chiefdoms repeatedly in the last three centuries in Madagascar, Hawaii,
Tahiti, and many parts of Africa. Chiefdoms have arisen pristinely even
more often, in all of the same regions and in North America's Southeast
and Pacific Northwest, the Amazon, Polynesia, and sub-Saharan Africa.
All these origins of complex societies give us a rich database for under
standing their development.
Of the many theories addressing the problem of state origins, the sim
plest denies that there is any problem to solve. Aristotle considered states
the natural condition of human society, requiring no explanation. His
error was understandable, because all the societies with which he would
have been acquainted—Greek societies of the fourth century B.C.—were