58 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Finally, Polynesian material culture varied from the production of no more
than personal utensils to the construction of monumental stone architec
ture. How can all that variation be explained?
Contributing to these differences among Polynesian societies were at
least six sets of environmental variables among Polynesian islands: island
climate, geological type, marine resources, area, terrain fragmentation,
and isolation. Let's examine the ranges of these factors, before considering
their specific consequences for Polynesian societies.
The climate in Polynesia varies from warm tropical or subtropical on
most islands, which lie near the equator, to temperate on most of New
Zealand, and cold subantarctic on the Chathams and the southern part of
New Zealand's South Island. Hawaii's Big Island, though lying well within
the Tropic of Cancer, has mountains high enough to support alpine habi
tats and receive occasional snowfalls. Rainfall varies from the highest
recorded on Earth (in New Zealand's Fjordland and Hawaii's Alakai
Swamp on Kauai) to only one-tenth as much on islands so dry that they
are marginal for agriculture.
Island geological types include coral atolls, raised limestone, volcanic
islands, pieces of continents, and mixtures of those types. At one extreme,
innumerable islets, such as those of the Tuamotu Archipelago, are flat, low
atolls barely rising above sea level. Other former atolls, such as Henderson
and Rennell, have been lifted far above sea level to constitute raised lime
stone islands. Both of those atoll types present problems to human settlers,
because they consist entirely of limestone without other stones, have only
very thin soil, and lack permanent fresh water. At the opposite extreme,
the largest Polynesian island, New Zealand, is an old, geologically diverse,
continental fragment of Gondwanaland, offering a range of mineral
resources, including commercially exploitable iron, coal, gold, and jade.
Most other large Polynesian islands are volcanoes that rose from the sea,
have never formed parts of a continent, and may or may not include areas
of raised limestone. While lacking New Zealand's geological richness, the
oceanic volcanic islands at least are an improvement over atolls (from the
Polynesians' perspective) in that they offer diverse types of volcanic stones,
some of which are highly suitable for making stone tools.
The volcanic islands differ among themselves. The elevations of the
higher ones generate rain in the mountains, so the islands are heavily
weathered and have deep soils and permanent streams. That is true, for
instance, of the Societies, Samoa, the Marquesas, and especially Hawaii,