HEMISPHERES COLLIDING • 3 7 3
and Indian hunter-gatherers, the world's greatest masters of Arctic survival
skills.
THE SECOND EURASIAN attempt to colonize the Americas succeeded
because it involved a source, target, latitude, and time that allowed
Europe's potential advantages to be exerted effectively. Spain, unlike Nor
way, was rich and populous enough to support exploration and subsidize
colonies. Spanish landfalls in the Americas were at subtropical latitudes
highly suitable for food production, based at first mostly on Native Ameri
can crops but also on Eurasian domestic animals, especially cattle and
horses. Spain's transatlantic colonial enterprise began in 1492, at the end
of a century of rapid development of European oceangoing ship technol
ogy, which by then incorporated advances in navigation, sails, and ship
design developed by Old World societies (Islam, India, China, and Indone
sia) in the Indian Ocean. As a result, ships built and manned in Spain itself
were able to sail to the West Indies; there was nothing equivalent to the
Greenland bottleneck that had throttled Norse colonization. Spain's New
World colonies were soon joined by those of half a dozen other European
states.
The first European settlements in the Americas, beginning with the one
founded by Columbus in 1492, were in the West Indies. The island Indi
ans, whose estimated population at the time of their "discovery" exceeded
a million, were rapidly exterminated on most islands by disease, disposses
sion, enslavement, warfare, and casual murder. Around 1508 the first col
ony was founded on the American mainland, at the Isthmus of Panama.
Conquest of the two large mainland empires, those of the Aztecs and Incas,
followed in 1519-1520 and 1532-1533, respectively. In both conquests
European-transmitted epidemics (probably smallpox) made major contri
butions, by killing the emperors themselves, as well as a large fraction of
the population. The overwhelming military superiority of even tiny num
bers of mounted Spaniards, together with their political skills at exploiting
divisions within the native population, did the rest. European conquest of
the remaining native states of Central America and northern South
America followed during the 16th and 17th centuries.
As for the most advanced native societies of North America, those of
the U.S. Southeast and the Mississippi River system, their destruction was