24 " PROLOGUE
steel arise first in Africa, permitting Africans and their germs to conquer
Europe? And what accounts for the failure of Aboriginal Australians to
pass beyond the stage of hunter-gatherers with stone tools?
Questions that emerge from worldwide comparisons of human societies
formerly attracted much attention from historians and geographers. The
best-known modern example of such an effort was Arnold Toynbee's 12-
volume Study of History. Toynbee was especially interested in the internal
dynamics of 23 advanced civilizations, of which 22 were literate and 19
were Eurasian. He was less interested in prehistory and in simpler, nonlit¬
erate societies. Yet the roots of inequality in the modern world lie far back
in prehistory. Hence Toynbee did not pose Yali's question, nor did he come
to grips with what I see as history's broadest pattern. Other available
books on world history similarly tend to focus on advanced literate Eur
asian civilizations of the last 5,000 years; they have a very brief treatment
of pre-Columbian Native American civilizations, and an even briefer dis
cussion of the rest of the world except for its recent interactions with Eur
asian civilizations. Since Toynbee's attempt, worldwide syntheses of
historical causation have fallen into disfavor among most historians, as
posing an apparently intractable problem.
Specialists from several disciplines have provided global syntheses of
their subjects. Especially useful contributions have been made by ecologi
cal geographers, cultural anthropologists, biologists studying plant and
animal domestication, and scholars concerned with the impact of infec
tious diseases on history. These studies have called attention to parts of
the puzzle, but they provide only pieces of the needed broad synthesis that
has been missing.
Thus, there is no generally accepted answer to Yali's question. On the
one hand, the proximate explanations are clear: some peoples developed
guns, germs, steel, and other factors conferring political and economic
power before others did; and some peoples never developed these power
factors at all. On the other hand, the ultimate explanations—for example,
why bronze tools appeared early in parts of Eurasia, late and only locally
in the New World, and never in Aboriginal Australia—remain unclear.
Our present lack of such ultimate explanations leaves a big intellectual
gap, since the broadest pattern of history thus remains unexplained. Much
more serious, though, is the moral gap left unfilled. It is perfectly obvious
to everyone, whether an overt racist or not, that different peoples have
fared differently in history. The modern United States is a European-