BLUEPRINTS AND BORROWED LETTERS • 235
stage. One-third of all Linear B tablets from the palace of Knossos are
accountants' records of sheep and wool, while an inordinate proportion
of writing at the palace of Pylos consists of records of flax. Linear B was
inherently so ambiguous that it remained restricted to palace accounts,
whose context and limited word choices made the interpretation clear.
Not a trace of its use for literature has survived. The Iliad and Odyssey
were composed and transmitted by nonliterate bards for nonliterate listen
ers, and not committed to writing until the development of the Greek
alphabet hundreds of years later.
Similarly restricted uses characterize early Egyptian, Mesoamerican,
and Chinese writing. Early Egyptian hieroglyphs recorded religious and
state propaganda and bureaucratic accounts. Preserved Maya writing was
similarly devoted to propaganda, births and accessions and victories of
kings, and astronomical observations of priests. The oldest preserved Chi
nese writing of the late Shang Dynasty consists of religious divination
about dynastic affairs, incised into so-called oracle bones. A sample Shang
text: "The king, reading the meaning of the crack [in a bone cracked by
heating], said: 'If the child is born on a keng day, it will be extremely
auspicious.' "
To us today, it is tempting to ask why societies with early writing sys
tems accepted the ambiguities that restricted writing to a few functions
and a few scribes. But even to pose that question is to illustrate the gap
between ancient perspectives and our own expectations of mass literacy.
The intended restricted uses of early writing provided a positive disincen
tive for devising less ambiguous writing systems. The kings and priests of
ancient Sumer wanted writing to be used by professional scribes to record
numbers of sheep owed in taxes, not by the masses to write poetry and
hatch plots. As the anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss put it, ancient writ
ing's main function was "to facilitate the enslavement of other human
beings." Personal uses of writing by nonprofessionals came only much
later, as writing systems grew simpler and more expressive.
For instance, with the fall of Mycenaean Greek civilization, around
1200 B.C., Linear B disappeared, and Greece returned to an age of preliter-
acy. When writing finally returned to Greece, in the eighth century B.c.,
the new Greek writing, its users, and its uses were very different. The writ
ing was no longer an ambiguous syllabary mixed with logograms but an
alphabet borrowed from the Phoenician consonantal alphabet and
improved by the Greek invention of vowels. In place of lists of sheep, legi-