NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 45
the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens and others. All this is not to deny
that Watt greatly improved Newcomen's engine (by incorporating a sepa
rate steam condenser and a double-acting cylinder), just as Newcomen had
greatly improved Savery's.
Similar histories can be related for all modern inventions that are ade
quately documented. The hero customarily credited with the invention fol
lowed previous inventors who had had similar aims and had already
produced designs, working models, or (as in the case of the Newcomen
steam engine) commercially successful models. Edison's famous "inven
tion" of the incandescent light bulb on the night of October 21, 1879,
improved on many other incandescent light bulbs patented by other inven
tors between 1841 and 1878. Similarly, the Wright brothers' manned pow
ered airplane was preceded by the manned unpowered gliders of Otto
Lilienthal and the unmanned powered airplane of Samuel Langley; Samuel
Morse's telegraph was preceded by those of Joseph Henry, William Cooke,
and Charles Wheatstone; and Eli Whitney's gin for cleaning short-staple
(inland) cotton extended gins that had been cleaning long-staple (Sea
Island) cotton for thousands of years.
All this is not to deny that Watt, Edison, the Wright brothers, Morse,
and Whitney made big improvements and thereby increased or inaugu
rated commercial success. The form of the invention eventually adopted
might have been somewhat different without the recognized inventor's
contribution. But the question for our purposes is whether the broad pat
tern of world history would have been altered significantly if some genius
inventor had not been born at a particular place and time. The answer is
clear: there has never been any such person. All recognized famous inven
tors had capable predecessors and successors and made their improve
ments at a time when society was capable of using their product. As we
shall see, the tragedy of the hero who perfected the stamps used for the
Phaistos disk was that he or she devised something that the society of the
time could not exploit on a large scale.
EXAMPLES so far have been drawn from modern technologies,
because their histories are well known. My two main conclusions are that
technology develops cumulatively, rather than in isolated heroic acts, and
that it finds most of its uses after it has been invented, rather than being