64 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
conscripted them to work on large construction projects, whose form var
ied from island to island: irrigation projects and fishponds on Hawaii,
dance and feast centers on the Marquesas, chiefs' tombs on Tonga, and
temples on Hawaii, the Societies, and Easter.
At the time of Europeans' arrival in the 18th century, the Tongan chief-
dom or state had already become an inter-archipelagal empire. Because
the Tongan Archipelago itself was geographically close-knit and included
several large islands with unfragmented terrain, each island became unified
under a single chief; then the hereditary chiefs of the largest Tongan island
(Tongatapu) united the whole archipelago, and eventually they conquered
islands outside the archipelago up to 500 miles distant. They engaged in
regular long-distance trade with Fiji and Samoa, established Tongan settle
ments in Fiji, and began to raid and conquer parts of Fiji. The conquest
and administration of this maritime proto-empire were achieved by navies
of large canoes, each holding up to 150 men.
Like Tonga, Hawaii became a political entity encompassing several
populous islands, but one confined to a single archipelago because of its
extreme isolation. At the time of Hawaii's "discovery" by Europeans in
1778, political unification had already taken place within each Hawaiian
island, and some political fusion between islands had begun. The four
largest islands—Big Island (Hawaii in the narrow sense), Maui, Oahu, and
Kauai—remained independent, controlling (or jockeying with each other
for control of) the smaller islands (Lanai, Molokai, Kahoolawe, and Nii¬
hau). After the arrival of Europeans, the Big Island's King Kamehameha I
rapidly proceeded with the consolidation of the largest islands by purchas
ing European guns and ships to invade and conquer first Maui and then
Oahu. Kamehameha thereupon prepared invasions of the last independent
Hawaiian island, Kauai, whose chief finally reached a negotiated settle
ment with him, completing the archipelago's unification.
The remaining type of variation among Polynesian societies to be con
sidered involves tools and other aspects of material culture. The differing
availability of raw materials imposed an obvious constraint on material
culture. At the one extreme was Henderson Island, an old coral reef raised
above sea level and devoid of stone other than limestone. Its inhabitants
were reduced to fabricating adzes out of giant clamshells. At the opposite
extreme, the Maori on the minicontinent of New Zealand had access to a
wide range of raw materials and became especially noted for their use of
jade. Between those two extremes fell Polynesia's oceanic volcanic islands,