348 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
sites are on big islands like Luzon and Borneo and Celebes, sites with Lap-
ita pottery in the New Guinea region are virtually confined to small islets
fringing remote larger islands. To date, Lapita pottery has been found at
only one site (Aitape) on the north coast of New Guinea itself, and at a
couple of sites in the Solomons. Most Lapita sites of the New Guinea
region are in the Bismarcks, on islets off the coast of the larger Bismarck
islands, occasionally on the coasts of the larger islands themselves. Since
(as we shall see) the makers of Lapita pottery were capable of sailing thou
sands of miles, their failure to transfer their villages a few miles to the large
Bismarck islands, or a few dozen miles to New Guinea, was certainly not
due to inability to get there.
The basis of Lapita subsistence can be reconstructed from the garbage
excavated by archaeologists at Lapita sites. Lapita people depended heav
ily on seafood, including fish, porpoises, sea turtles, sharks, and shellfish.
They had pigs, chickens, and dogs and ate the nuts of many trees (includ
ing coconuts). While they probably also ate the usual Austronesian root
crops, such as taro and yams, evidence of those crops is hard to obtain,
because hard nut shells are much more likely than soft roots to persist for
thousands of years in garbage heaps.
Naturally, it is impossible to prove directly that the people who made
Lapita pots spoke an Austronesian language. However, two facts make
this inference virtually certain. First, except for the decorations on the
pots, the pots themselves and their associated cultural paraphernalia are
similar to the cultural remains found at Indonesian and Philippine sites
ancestral to modern Austronesian-speaking societies. Second, Lapita pot
tery also appears on remote Pacific islands with no previous human inhab
itants, with no evidence of a major second wave of settlement subsequent
to that bringing Lapita pots, and where the modern inhabitants speak an
Austronesian language (more of this below). Hence Lapita pottery may be
safely assumed to mark Austronesians' arrival in the New Guinea region.
What were those Austronesian pot makers doing on islets adjacent to
bigger islands? They were probably living in the same way as modern pot
makers lived until recently on islets in the New Guinea region. In 1972 I
visited such a village on Malai Islet, in the Siassi island group, off the
medium-sized island of Umboi, off the larger Bismarck island of New Brit
ain. When I stepped ashore on Malai in search of birds, knowing nothing
about the people there, I was astonished by the sight that greeted me.