292 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Where population densities are high, as in regions occupied by states or
chiefdoms, the defeated still have nowhere to flee, but the victors now
have two options for exploiting them while leaving them alive. Because
chiefdoms and state societies have economic specialization, the defeated
can be used as slaves, as commonly happened in biblical times. Alterna
tively, because many such societies have intensive food production systems
capable of yielding large surpluses, the victors can leave the defeated in
place but deprive them of political autonomy, make them pay regular trib
ute in food or goods, and amalgamate their society into the victorious state
or chiefdom. This has been the usual outcome of battles associated with
the founding of states or empires throughout recorded history. For exam
ple, the Spanish conquistadores wished to exact tribute from Mexico's
defeated native populations, so they were very interested in the Aztec
Empire's tribute lists. It turned out that the tribute received by the Aztecs
each year from subject peoples had included 7,000 tons of corn, 4,000
tons of beans, 4,000 tons of grain amaranth, 2,000,000 cotton cloaks, and
huge quantities of cacao beans, war costumes, shields, feather headdresses,
and amber.
Thus, food production, and competition and diffusion between socie
ties, led as ultimate causes, via chains of causation that differed in detail
but that all involved large dense populations and sedentary living, to the
proximate agents of conquest: germs, writing, technology, and centralized
political organization. Because those ultimate causes developed differently
on different continents, so did those agents of conquest. Hence those
agents tended to arise in association with each other, but the association
was not strict: for example, an empire arose without writing among the
Incas, and writing with few epidemic diseases among the Aztecs. Dingis¬
wayo's Zulus illustrate that each of those agents contributed somewhat
independently to history's pattern. Among the dozens of Zulu chiefdoms,
the Mtetwa chiefdom enjoyed no advantage whatsoever of technology,
writing, or germs over the other chiefdoms, which it nevertheless suc
ceeded in defeating. Its advantage lay solely in the spheres of government
and ideology. The resulting Zulu state was thereby enabled to conquer a
fraction of a continent for nearly a century.