FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 2 85
plex society? Or are large populations and complex societies instead the
cause, somehow leading to intensification of food production?
Posing the question in that either-or form misses the point. Intensified
food production and societal complexity stimulate each other, by autoca¬
talysis. That is, population growth leads to societal complexity, by mecha
nisms that we shall discuss, while societal complexity in turn leads to
intensified food production and thereby to population growth. Complex
centralized societies are uniquely capable of organizing public works
(including irrigation systems), long-distance trade (including the importa
tion of metals to make better agricultural tools), and activities of different
groups of economic specialists (such as feeding herders with farmers'
cereal, and transferring the herders' livestock to farmers for use as plow
animals). All of these capabilities of centralized societies have fostered
intensified food production and hence population growth throughout his
tory.
In addition, food production contributes in at least three ways to spe
cific features of complex societies. First, it involves seasonally pulsed
inputs of labor. When the harvest has been stored, the farmers' labor
becomes available for a centralized political authority to harness—in order
to build public works advertising state power (such as the Egyptian pyra
mids), or to build public works that could feed more mouths (such as
Polynesian Hawaii's irrigation systems or fishponds), or to undertake wars
of conquest to form larger political entities.
Second, food production may be organized so as to generate stored food
surpluses, which permit economic specialization and social stratification.
The surpluses can be used to feed all tiers of a complex society: the chiefs,
bureaucrats, and other members of the elite; the scribes, craftspeople, and
other non-food-producing specialists; and the farmers themselves, during
times that they are drafted to construct public works.
Finally, food production permits or requires people to adopt sedentary
living, which is a prerequisite for accumulating substantial possessions,
developing elaborate technology and crafts, and constructing public
works. The importance of fixed residence to a complex society explains
why missionaries and governments, whenever they make first contact with
previously uncontacted nomadic tribes or bands in New Guinea or the
Amazon, universally have two immediate goals. One goal, of course, is the
obvious one of "pacifying" the nomads: that is, dissuading them from
killing missionaries, bureaucrats, or each other. The other goal is to induce