8 6 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
of the American West. Fred Hirschy's family was proud of him, as a pio
neer farmer who had succeeded under difficult conditions. But Levi's tribe
of hunters and famous warriors had been robbed of its lands by the immi
grant white farmers. How did the farmers win out over the famous war
riors?
For most of the time since the ancestors of modern humans diverged
from the ancestors of the living great apes, around 7 million years ago, all
humans on Earth fed themselves exclusively by hunting wild animals and
gathering wild plants, as the Blackfeet still did in the 19th century. It was
only within the last 11,000 years that some peoples turned to what is
termed food production: that is, domesticating wild animals and plants
and eating the resulting livestock and crops. Today, most people on Earth
consume food that they produced themselves or that someone else pro
duced for them. At current rates of change, within the next decade the few
remaining bands of hunter-gatherers will abandon their ways, disintegrate,
or die out, thereby ending our millions of years of commitment to the
hunter-gatherer lifestyle.
Different peoples acquired food production at different times in prehis
tory. Some, such as Aboriginal Australians, never acquired it at all. Of
those who did, some (for example, the ancient Chinese) developed it inde
pendently by themselves, while others (including ancient Egyptians)
acquired it from neighbors. But, as we'll see, food production was indi
rectly a prerequisite for the development of guns, germs, and steel. Hence
geographic variation in whether, or when, the peoples of different conti
nents became farmers and herders explains to a large extent their subse
quent contrasting fates. Before we devote the next six chapters to
understanding how geographic differences in food production arose, this
chapter will trace the main connections through which food production
led to all the advantages that enabled Pizarro to capture Atahuallpa, and
Fred Hirschy's people to dispossess Levi's (Figure 4.1).
The first connection is the most direct one: availability of more consum-
Figure 4.1. Schematic overview of the chains of causation leading up to
proximate factors (such as guns, horses, and diseases) enabling some peo
ples to conquer other peoples, from ultimate factors (such as the orienta
tion of continental axes). For example, diverse epidemic diseases of
humans evolved in areas with many wild plant and animal species suit
able for domestication, partly because the resulting crops and livestock