FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 2 67
world. The combination of government and religion has thus functioned,
together with germs, writing, and technology, as one of the four main sets
of proximate agents leading to history's broadest pattern. How did gov
ernment and religion arise?
FAYU BANDS AND modern states represent opposite extremes along the
spectrum of human societies. Modern American society and the Fayu dif
fer in the presence or absence of a professional police force, cities, money,
distinctions between rich and poor, and many other political, economic,
and social institutions. Did all of those institutions arise together, or did
some arise before others? We can infer the answer to this question by com
paring modern societies at different levels of organization, by examining
written accounts or archaeological evidence about past societies, and by
observing how a society's institutions change over time.
Cultural anthropologists attempting to describe the diversity of human
societies often divide them into as many as half a dozen categories. Any
such attempt to define stages of any evolutionary or developmental contin
uum—whether of musical styles, human life stages, or human societies—
is doubly doomed to imperfection. First, because each stage grows out of
some previous stage, the lines of demarcation are inevitably arbitrary. (For
example, is a 19-year-old person an adolescent or a young adult?) Second,
developmental sequences are not invariant, so examples pigeonholed
under the same stage are inevitably heterogeneous. (Brahms and Liszt
would turn in their graves to know that they are now grouped together
as composers of the romantic period.) Nevertheless, arbitrarily delineated
stages provide a useful shorthand for discussing the diversity of music and
of human societies, provided one bears in mind the above caveats. In that
spirit, we shall use a simple classification based on just four categories—
band, tribe, chiefdom, and state (see Table 14.1)—to understand societies.
Bands are the tiniest societies, consisting typically of 5 to 80 people,
most or all of them close relatives by birth or by marriage. In effect, a band
is an extended family or several related extended families. Today, bands
still living autonomously are almost confined to the most remote parts of
New Guinea and Amazonia, but within modern times there were many
others that have only recently fallen under state control or been assimi
lated or exterminated. They include many or most African Pygmies, south
ern African San hunter-gatherers (so-called Bushmen), Aboriginal