HOW AFRICA BECAME BLACK • 3 85
guages, are packed into a tiny area of Cameroon and adjacent eastern
Nigeria.
Evidently, the Niger-Congo language family arose in West Africa; the
Bantu branch of it arose at the east end of that range, in Cameroon and
Nigeria; and the Bantu then spread out of that homeland over most of
subequatorial Africa. That spread must have begun long ago enough that
the ancestral Bantu language had time to split into 500 daughter lan
guages, but nevertheless recently enough that all those daughter languages
are still very similar to each other. Since all other Niger-Congo speakers,
as well as the Bantu, are blacks, we couldn't have inferred who migrated
in which direction just from the evidence of physical anthropology.
To make this type of linguistic reasoning clear, let me give you a familiar
example: the geographic origins of the English language. Today, by far
the largest number of people whose first language is English live in North
America, with others scattered over the globe in Britain, Australia, and
other countries. Each of those countries has its own dialects of English. If
we knew nothing else about language distributions and history, we might
have guessed that the English language arose in North America and was
carried overseas to Britain and Australia by colonists.
But all those English dialects form only one low-order subgroup of the
Germanic language family. All the other subgroups—the various Scandina
vian, German, and Dutch languages—are crammed into northwestern
Europe. In particular, Frisian, the other Germanic language most closely
related to English, is confined to a tiny coastal area of Holland and western
Germany. Hence a linguist would immediately deduce correctly that the
English language arose in coastal northwestern Europe and spread around
the world from there. In fact, we know from recorded history that English
really was carried from there to England by invading Anglo-Saxons in the
fifth and sixth centuries A.D.
Essentially the same line of reasoning tells us that the nearly 200 million
Bantu people, now flung over much of the map of Africa, arose from Cam
eroon and Nigeria. Along with the North African origins of Semites and
the origins of Madagascar's Asians, that's another conclusion that we
couldn't have reached without linguistic evidence.
We had already deduced, from Khoisan language distributions and the
lack of distinct Pygmy languages, that Pygmies and Khoisan peoples had
formerly ranged more widely, until they were engulfed by blacks. (I'm
using "engulfing" as a neutral all-embracing word, regardless of whether