3 96 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
compete against numerous Nilo-Saharan and Afroasiatic Iron Age farm
ers. But to the south lay 2,000 miles of country thinly occupied by Khoisan
hunter-gatherers, lacking iron and crops. Within a few centuries, in one of
the swiftest colonizing advances of recent prehistory, Bantu farmers had
swept all the way to Natal, on the east coast of what is now South Africa.
It's easy to oversimplify what was undoubtedly a rapid and dramatic
expansion, and to picture all Khoisan in the way being trampled by
onrushing Bantu hordes. In reality, things were more complicated. Khoisan
peoples of southern Africa had already acquired sheep and cattle a few
centuries ahead of the Bantu advance. The first Bantu pioneers probably
were few in number, selected wet-forest areas suitable for their yam
agriculture, and leapfrogged over drier areas, which they left to Khoisan
herders and hunter-gatherers. Trading and marriage relationships were
undoubtedly established between those Khoisan and the Bantu farmers,
each occupying different adjacent habitats, just as Pygmy hunter-gatherers
and Bantu farmers still do today in equatorial Africa. Only gradually, as
the Bantu multiplied and incorporated cattle and dry-climate cereals into
their economy, did they fill in the leapfrogged areas. But the eventual result
was still the same: Bantu farmers occupying most of the former Khoisan
realm; the legacy of those former Khoisan inhabitants reduced to clicks in
scattered non-Khoisan languages, as well as buried skulls and stone tools
waiting for archaeologists to discover; and the Khoisan-like appearance of
some southern African Bantu peoples.
What actually happened to all those vanished Khoisan populations? We
don't know. All we can say for sure is that, in places where Khoisan peo
ples had lived for perhaps tens of thousands of years, there are now Bantu.
We can only venture a guess, by analogy with witnessed events in modern
times when steel-toting white farmers collided with stone tool-using
hunter-gatherers of Aboriginal Australia and Indian California. There, we
know that hunter-gatherers were rapidly eliminated in a combination of
ways: they were driven out, men were killed or enslaved, women were
appropriated as wives, and both sexes became infected with epidemics of
the farmers' diseases. An example of such a disease in Africa is malaria,
which is borne by mosquitoes that breed around farmers' villages, and to
which the invading Bantu had already developed genetic resistance but
Khoisan hunter-gatherers probably had not.
However, Figure 19.1, of recent African human distributions, reminds
us that the Bantu did not overrun all the Khoisan, who did survive in