LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK • 1 97
from diseases of animals, even though most of the microbes responsible
for our own epidemic illnesses are paradoxically now almost confined to
humans. Because diseases have been the biggest killers of people, they have
also been decisive shapers of history. Until World War II, more victims of
war died of war-borne microbes than of battle wounds. All those military
histories glorifying great generals oversimplify the ego-deflating truth: the
winners of past wars were not always the armies with the best generals
and weapons, but were often merely those bearing the nastiest germs to
transmit to their enemies.
The grimmest examples of germs' role in history come from the Euro
pean conquest of the Americas that began with Columbus's voyage of
1492. Numerous as were the Native American victims of the murderous
Spanish conquistadores, they were far outnumbered by the victims of mur
derous Spanish microbes. Why was the exchange of nasty germs between
the Americas and Europe so unequal? Why didn't Native American dis
eases instead decimate the Spanish invaders, spread back to Europe, and
wipe out 95 percent of Europe's population? Similar questions arise for
the decimation of many other native peoples by Eurasian germs, as well as
for the decimation of would-be European conquistadores in the tropics of
Africa and Asia.
Thus, questions of the animal origins of human disease lie behind the
broadest pattern of human history, and behind some of the most important
issues in human health today. (Think of AIDS, an explosively spreading
human disease that appears to have evolved from a virus resident in wild
African monkeys.) This chapter will begin by considering what a "disease"
is, and why some microbes have evolved so as to "make us sick," whereas
most other species of living things don't make us sick. We'll examine why
many of our most familiar infectious diseases run in epidemics, such as our
current AIDS epidemic and the Black Death (bubonic plague) epidemics of
the Middle Ages. We'll then consider how the ancestors of microbes now
confined to us transferred themselves from their original animal hosts.
Finally, we'll see how insight into the animal origins of our infectious dis
eases helps explain the momentous, almost one-way exchange of germs
between Europeans and Native Americans.
NATURALLY, WE'RE DISPOSED to think about diseases just from our
own point of view: what can we do to save ourselves and to kill the