HOW TO MAKE AN ALMOND • I I 5
opment is today a conscious, highly specialized effort carried out by pro
fessional scientists. They already know about the hundreds of existing
crops and set out to develop yet another one. To achieve that goal, they
plant many different seeds or roots, select the best progeny and plant their
seeds, apply knowledge of genetics to develop good varieties that breed
true, and perhaps even use the latest techniques of genetic engineering to
transfer specific useful genes. At the Davis campus of the University of
California, an entire department (the Department of Pomology) is devoted
to apples and another (the Department of Viticulture and Enology) to
grapes and wine.
But plant domestication goes back over 10,000 years. Early farmers
surely didn't use molecular genetic techniques to arrive at their results. The
first farmers didn't even have any existing crop as a model to inspire them
to develop new ones. Hence they couldn't have known that, whatever they
were doing, they would enjoy a tasty treat as a result.
How, then, did early farmers domesticate plants unwittingly? For exam
ple, how did they turn poisonous almonds into safe ones without knowing
what they were doing? What changes did they actually make in wild
plants, besides rendering some of them bigger or less poisonous? Even for
valuable crops, the times of domestication vary greatly: for instance, peas
were domesticated by 8000 B.C., olives around 4000 B.C., strawberries not
until the Middle Ages, and pecans not until 1846. Many valuable wild
plants yielding food prized by millions of people, such as oaks sought for
their edible acorns in many parts of the world, remain untamed even
today. What made some plants so much easier or more inviting to domesti
cate than others? Why did olive trees yield to Stone Age farmers, whereas
oak trees continue to defeat our brightest agronomists?
LET' S BEGIN BY looking at domestication from the plant's point of view.
As far as plants are concerned, we're just one of thousands of animal spe
cies that unconsciously "domesticate" plants.
Like all animal species (including humans), plants must spread their
offspring to areas where they can thrive and pass on their parents' genes.
Young animals disperse by walking or flying, but plants don't have that
option, so they must somehow hitchhike. While some plant species have
seeds adapted for being carried by the wind or for floating on water, many