HOW AFRICA BECAME BLACK " 3 97
southern African areas unsuitable for Bantu agriculture. The southernmost
Bantu people, the Xhosa, stopped at the Fish River on South Africa's south
coast, 500 miles east of Cape Town. It's not that the Cape of Good Hope
itself is too dry for agriculture: it is, after all, the breadbasket of modern
South Africa. Instead, the Cape has a Mediterranean climate of winter
rains, in which the Bantu summer-rain crops do not grow. By 1652, the
year the Dutch arrived at Cape Town with their winter-rain crops of Near
Eastern origin, the Xhosa had still not spread beyond the Fish River.
That seeming detail of plant geography had enormous implications for
politics today. One consequence was that, once South African whites had
quickly killed or infected or driven off the Cape's Khoisan population,
whites could claim correctly that they had occupied the Cape before the
Bantu and thus had prior rights to it. That claim needn't be taken seriously,
since the prior rights of the Cape Khoisan didn't inhibit whites from dis
possessing them. The much heavier consequence was that the Dutch set
tlers in 1652 had to contend only with a sparse population of Khoisan
herders, not with a dense population of steel-equipped Bantu farmers.
When whites finally spread east to encounter the Xhosa at the Fish River
in 1702, a period of desperate fighting began. Even though Europeans by
then could supply troops from their secure base at the Cape, it took nine
wars and 175 years for their armies, advancing at an average rate of less
than one mile per year, to subdue the Xhosa. How could whites have suc
ceeded in establishing themselves at the Cape at all, if those first few arriv
ing Dutch ships had faced such fierce resistance?
Thus, the problems of modern South Africa stem at least in part from a
geographic accident. The homeland of the Cape Khoisan happened to con
tain few wild plants suitable for domestication; the Bantu happened to
inherit summer-rain crops from their ancestors of 5,000 years ago; and
Europeans happened to inherit winter-rain crops from their ancestors of
nearly 10,000 years ago. Just as the sign "Goering Street" in the capital of
newly independent Namibia reminded me, Africa's past has stamped itself
deeply on Africa's present.
THAT'S HOW THE Bantu were able to engulf the Khoisan, instead of vice
versa. Now let's turn to the remaining question in our puzzle of African
prehistory: why Europeans were the ones to colonize sub-Saharan Africa.
That it was not the other way around is especially surprising, because