A NATURAL EXPERIMENT OF HISTORY • 59
the Polynesian archipelago with the highest mountains. Among the lower
islands, Tonga and (to a lesser extent) Easter also have rich soil because of
volcanic ashfalls, but they lack Hawaii's large streams.
As for marine resources, most Polynesian islands are surrounded by
shallow water and reefs, and many also encompass lagoons. Those envi
ronments teem with fish and shellfish. However, the rocky coasts of Easter,
Pitcairn, and the Marquesas, and the steeply dropping ocean bottom and
absence of coral reefs around those islands, are much less productive of
seafood.
Area is another obvious variable, ranging from the 100 acres of Anuta,
the smallest permanently inhabited isolated Polynesian island, up to the
103,000 square miles of the minicontinent of New Zealand. The habitable
terrain of some islands, notably the Marquesas, is fragmented into steep-
walled valleys by ridges, while other islands, such as Tonga and Easter,
consist of gently rolling terrain presenting no obstacles to travel and com
munication.
The last environmental variable to consider is isolation. Easter Island
and the Chathams are small and so remote from other islands that, once
they were initially colonized, the societies thus founded developed in total
isolation from the rest of the world. New Zealand, Hawaii, and the Mar
quesas are also very remote, but at least the latter two apparently did have
some further contact with other archipelagoes after the first colonization,
and all three consist of many islands close enough to each other for regular
contact between islands of the same archipelago. Most other Polynesian
islands were in more or less regular contact with other islands. In particu
lar, the Tongan Archipelago lies close enough to the Fijian, Samoan, and
Wallis Archipelagoes to have permitted regular voyaging between archipel
agoes, and eventually to permit Tongans to undertake the conquest of Fiji.
AFTER THAT BRIEF look at Polynesia's varying environments, let's now
see how that variation influenced Polynesian societies. Subsistence is a con
venient facet of society with which to start, since it in turn affected other
facets.
Polynesian subsistence depended on varying mixes of fishing, gathering
wild plants and marine shellfish and Crustacea, hunting terrestrial birds
and breeding seabirds, and food production. Most Polynesian islands orig
inally supported big flightless birds that had evolved in the absence of