96 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
materials all deposited on the same day. Materials deposited at different
times can get mixed together, as worms and rodents and other agents
churn up the ground. Charcoal residues from a fire can thereby end up
close to the remains of a plant or animal that died and was eaten thousands
of years earlier or later. Increasingly today, archaeologists are circum
venting this problem by a new technique termed accelerator mass spec
trometry, which permits radiocarbon dating of tiny samples and thus lets
one directly date a single small seed, small bone, or other food residue. In
some cases big differences have been found between recent radiocarbon
dates based on the direct new methods (which have their own problems)
and those based on the indirect older ones. Among the resulting controver
sies remaining unresolved, perhaps the most important for the purposes of
this book concerns the date when food production originated in the Amer
icas: indirect methods of the 1960s and 1970s yielded dates as early as
7000 B.c., but more recent direct dating has been yielding dates no earlier
than 3500 B.C.
A second problem in radiocarbon dating is that the carbon 14 / carbon
12 ratio of the atmosphere is in fact not rigidly constant but fluctuates
slightly with time, so calculations of radiocarbon dates based on the
assumption of a constant ratio are subject to small systematic errors. The
magnitude of this error for each past date can in principle be determined
with the help of long-lived trees laying down annual growth rings, since
the rings can be counted up to obtain an absolute calendar date in the past
for each ring, and a carbon sample of wood dated in this manner can
then be analyzed for its carbon 14 / carbon 12 ratio. In this way, measured
radiocarbon dates can be "calibrated" to take account of fluctuations in
the atmospheric carbon ratio. The effect of this correction is that, for mate
rials with apparent (that is, uncalibrated) dates between about 1000 and
6000 B.C., the true (calibrated) date is between a few centuries and a thou
sand years earlier. Somewhat older samples have more recently begun to
be calibrated by an alternative method based on another radioactive decay
process and yielding the conclusion that samples apparently dating to
about 9000 B.C. actually date to around 11,000 B.C.
Archaeologists often distinguish calibrated from uncalibrated dates by
writing the former in upper-case letters and the latter in lower-case letters
(for example, 3000 B.c. vs. 3000 b.c., respectively). However, the archaeo
logical literature can be confusing in this respect, because many books and
papers report uncalibrated dates as B.C. and fail to mention that they are