220 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
River about 200 miles southeast of modern Baghdad. The first Sumerian
writing signs were recognizable pictures of the object referred to (for
instance, a picture of a fish or a bird). Naturally, those pictorial signs con
sisted mainly of numerals plus nouns for visible objects; the resulting texts
were merely accounting reports in a telegraphic shorthand devoid of gram
matical elements. Gradually, the forms of the signs became more abstract,
especially when the pointed writing tools were replaced by reed styluses.
New signs were created by combining old signs to produce new meanings:
for example, the sign for head was combined with the sign for bread in
order to produce a sign signifying eat.
The earliest Sumerian writing consisted of nonphonetic logograms.
That's to say, it was not based on the specific sounds of the Sumerian
language, and it could have been pronounced with entirely different
sounds to yield the same meaning in any other language—just as the
numeral sign 4 is variously pronounced four, chetwire, nelja, and empat
by speakers of English, Russian, Finnish, and Indonesian, respectively. Per
haps the most important single step in the whole history of writing was
the Sumerians' introduction of phonetic representation, initially by writing
an abstract noun (which could not be readily drawn as a picture) by means
of the sign for a depictable noun that had the same phonetic pronuncia
tion. For instance, it's easy to draw a recognizable picture of arrow, hard
to draw a recognizable picture of life, but both are pronounced ti in Sume
rian, so a picture of an arrow came to mean either arrow or life. The
resulting ambiguity was resolved by the addition of a silent sign called a
determinative, to indicate the category of nouns to which the intended
object belonged. Linguists term this decisive innovation, which also under
lies puns today, the rebus principle.
Once Sumerians had hit upon this phonetic principle, they began to use
it for much more than just writing abstract nouns. They employed it to
write syllables or letters constituting grammatical endings. For instance, in
English it's not obvious how to draw a picture of the common syllable
-tion, but we could instead draw a picture illustrating the verb shun, which
has the same pronunciation. Phonetically interpreted signs were also used
to "spell out" longer words, as a series of pictures each depicting the sound
of one syllable. That's as if an English speaker were to write the word
believe as a picture of a bee followed by a picture of a leaf. Phonetic signs
also permitted scribes to use the same pictorial sign for a set of related
words (such as tooth, speech, and speaker), but to resolve the ambiguity