416 • EPILOGUE
interior contributed different crops, livestock, technologies, and cultural
features to the eventually unified China. For example, millet cultivation,
bronze technology, and writing arose in North China, while rice cultiva
tion and cast-iron technology emerged in South China. For much of this
book I have emphasized the diffusion of technology that takes place in
the absence of formidable barriers. But China's connectedness eventually
became a disadvantage, because a decision by one despot could and repeat
edly did halt innovation. In contrast, Europe's geographic balkanization
resulted in dozens or hundreds of independent, competing statelets and
centers of innovation. If one state did not pursue some particular innova
tion, another did, forcing neighboring states to do likewise or else be con
quered or left economically behind. Europe's barriers were sufficient to
prevent political unification, but insufficient to halt the spread of technol
ogy and ideas. There has never been one despot who could turn off the tap
for all of Europe, as of China.
These comparisons suggest that geographic connectedness has exerted
both positive and negative effects on the evolution of technology. As a
result, in the very long run, technology may have developed most rapidly
in regions with moderate connectedness, neither too high nor too low.
Technology's course over the last 1,000 years in China, Europe, and possi
bly the Indian subcontinent exemplifies those net effects of high, moderate,
and low connectedness, respectively.
Naturally, additional factors contributed to history's diverse courses in
different parts of Eurasia. For instance, the Fertile Crescent, China, and
Europe differed in their exposure to the perennial threat of barbarian inva
sions by horse-mounted pastoral nomads of Central Asia. One of those
nomad groups (the Mongols) eventually destroyed the ancient irrigation
systems of Iran and Iraq, but none of the Asian nomads ever succeeded in
establishing themselves in the forests of western Europe beyond the Hun
garian plains. Environmental factors also include the Fertile Crescent's
geographically intermediate location, controlling the trade routes linking
China and India to Europe, and China's more remote location from Euras
ia's other advanced civilizations, making China a gigantic virtual island
within a continent. China's relative isolation is especially relevant to its
adoption and then rejection of technologies, so reminiscent of the rejec
tions on Tasmania and other islands (Chapters 13 and 15). But this brief
discussion may at least indicate the relevance of environmental factors to