NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 57
other than what they invented themselves. Australians and New Guineans,
separated from the Asian mainland by the Indonesian island chain,
received only a trickle of inventions from Asia. The societies most accessi
ble to receiving inventions by diffusion were those embedded in the major
continents. In these societies technology developed most rapidly, because
they accumulated not only their own inventions but also those of other
societies. For example, medieval Islam, centrally located in Eurasia,
acquired inventions from India and China and inherited ancient Greek
learning.
The importance of diffusion, and of geographic location in making it
possible, is strikingly illustrated by some otherwise incomprehensible cases
of societies that abandoned powerful technologies. We tend to assume that
useful technologies, once acquired, inevitably persist until superseded by
better ones. In reality, technologies must be not only acquired but also
maintained, and that too depends on many unpredictable factors. Any
society goes through social movements or fads, in which economically use
less things become valued or useful things devalued temporarily. Nowa
days, when almost all societies on Earth are connected to each other, we
cannot imagine a fad's going so far that an important technology would
actually be discarded. A society that temporarily turned against a powerful
technology would continue to see it being used by neighboring societies
and would have the opportunity to reacquire it by diffusion (or would be
conquered by neighbors if it failed to do so). But such fads can persist in
isolated societies.
A famous example involves Japan's abandonment of guns. Firearms
reached Japan in A.D. 1543, when two Portuguese adventurers armed with
harquebuses (primitive guns) arrived on a Chinese cargo ship. The Japa
nese were so impressed by the new weapon that they commenced indige
nous gun production, greatly improved gun technology, and by A.D. 1600
owned more and better guns than any other country in the world.
But there were also factors working against the acceptance of firearms
in Japan. The country had a numerous warrior class, the samurai, for
whom swords rated as class symbols and works of art (and as means for
subjugating the lower classes). Japanese warfare had previously involved
single combats between samurai swordsmen, who stood in the open, made
ritual speeches, and then took pride in fighting gracefully. Such behavior
became lethal in the presence of peasant soldiers ungracefully blasting
away with guns. In addition, guns were a foreign invention and grew to