HOW TO MAKE AN ALMOND • 1 19
uals must have sprouted around the latrines of ancient hikers.
While size and tastiness are the most obvious criteria by which human
hunter-gatherers select wild plants, other criteria include fleshy or seedless
fruits, oily seeds, and long fibers. Wild squashes and pumpkins have little
or no fruit around their seeds, but the preferences of early farmers selected
for squashes and pumpkins consisting of far more flesh than seeds. Culti
vated bananas were selected long ago to be all flesh and no seed, thereby
inspiring modern agricultural scientists to develop seedless oranges,
grapes, and watermelons as well. Seedlessness provides a good example of
how human selection can completely reverse the original evolved function
of a wild fruit, which in nature serves as a vehicle for dispersing seeds.
In ancient times many plants were similarly selected for oily fruits or
seeds. Among the earliest fruit trees domesticated in the Mediterranean
world were olives, cultivated since around 4000 B.C. for their oil. Crop
olives are not only bigger but also oilier than wild ones. Ancient farmers
selected sesame, mustard, poppies, and flax as well for oily seeds, while
modern plant scientists have done the same for sunflower, safflower, and
cotton.
Before that recent development of cotton for oil, it was of course
selected for its fibers, used to weave textiles. The fibers (termed lint) are
hairs on the cotton seeds, and early farmers of both the Americas and the
Old World independently selected different species of cotton for long lint.
In flax and hemp, two other plants grown to supply the textiles of antiq
uity, the fibers come instead from the stem, and plants were selected for
long, straight stems. While we think of most crops as being grown for
food, flax is one of our oldest crops (domesticated by around 7000 B.C.). It
furnished linen, which remained the chief textile of Europe until it became
supplanted by cotton and synthetics after the Industrial Revolution.
JO FAR, ALL the changes that I've described in the evolution of wild
plants into crops involve characters that early farmers could actually
notice—such as fruit size, bitterness, fleshiness, and oiliness, and fiber
length. By harvesting those individual wild plants possessing these desir
able qualities to an exceptional degree, ancient peoples unconsciously dis
persed the plants and set them on the road to domestication.
In addition, though, there were at least four other major types of change
that did not involve berry pickers making visible choices. In these cases the