HOW TO MAKE AN ALMOND • 125
cross-pollinated by another plant belonging to a genetically different vari
ety of their species. Hence early farmers either had to find mutant trees not
requiring cross-pollination, or had consciously to plant genetically differ
ent varieties or else male and female individuals nearby in the same
orchard. All those problems delayed the domestication of apples, pears,
plums, and cherries until around classical times. At about the same time,
though, another group of late domesticates arose with much less effort,
as wild plants that established themselves initially as weeds in fields of
intentionally cultivated crops. Crops starting out as weeds included rye
and oats, turnips and radishes, beets and leeks, and lettuce.
ALTHOUGH THE DETAILED sequence that I've just described applies to
the Fertile Crescent, partly similar sequences also appeared elsewhere in
the world. In particular, the Fertile Crescent's wheat and barley exemplify
the class of crops termed cereals or grains (members of the grass family),
while Fertile Crescent peas and lentils exemplify pulses (members of the
legume family, which includes beans). Cereal crops have the virtues of
being fast growing, high in carbohydrates, and yielding up to a ton of
edible food per hectare cultivated. As a result, cereals today account for
over half of all calories consumed by humans and include five of the mod
ern world's 12 leading crops (wheat, corn, rice, barley, and sorghum).
Many cereal crops are low in protein, but that deficit is made up by pulses,
which are often 25 percent protein (38 percent in the case of soybeans).
Cereals and pulses together thus provide many of the ingredients of a bal
anced diet.
As Table 7.1 (next page) summarizes, the domestication of local cereal /
pulse combinations launched food production in many areas. The most
familiar examples are the combination of wheat and barley with peas and
lentils in the Fertile Crescent, the combination of corn with several bean
species in Mesoamerica, and the combination of rice and millets with soy
beans and other beans in China. Less well known are Africa's combination
of sorghum, African rice, and pearl millet with cowpeas and groundnuts,
and the Andes' combination of the noncereal grain quinoa with several
bean species.
Table 7.1 also shows that the Fertile Crescent's early domestication of
flax for fiber was paralleled elsewhere. Hemp, four cotton species, yucca,
and agave variously furnished fiber for rope and woven clothing in China,