FARMER POWER • 89
cattle, and yak / cow hybrids. Here is one example of their value: the first
prehistoric farmers of central Europe, the so-called Linearbandkeramik
culture that arose slightly before 5000 B.C., were initially confined to soils
light enough to be tilled by means of hand-held digging sticks. Only over
a thousand years later, with the introduction of the ox-drawn plow, were
those farmers able to extend cultivation to a much wider range of heavy
soils and tough sods. Similarly, Native American farmers of the North
American Great Plains grew crops in the river valleys, but farming of the
tough sods on the extensive uplands had to await 19th-century Europeans
and their animal-drawn plows.
All those are direct ways in which plant and animal domestication led
to denser human populations by yielding more food than did the hunter-
gatherer lifestyle. A more indirect way involved the consequences of the
sedentary lifestyle enforced by food production. People of many hunter-
gatherer societies move frequently in search of wild foods, but farmers
must remain near their fields and orchards. The resulting fixed abode con
tributes to denser human populations by permitting a shortened birth
interval. A hunter-gatherer mother who is shifting camp can carry only
one child, along with her few possessions. She cannot afford to bear her
next child until the previous toddler can walk fast enough to keep up with
the tribe and not hold it back. In practice, nomadic hunter-gatherers space
their children about four years apart by means of lactational amenorrhea,
sexual abstinence, infanticide, and abortion. By contrast, sedentary peo
ple, unconstrained by problems of carrying young children on treks, can
bear and raise as many children as they can feed. The birth interval for
many farm peoples is around two years, half that of hunter-gatherers. That
higher birthrate of food producers, together with their ability to feed more
people per acre, lets them achieve much higher population densities than
hunter-gatherers.
A separate consequence of a settled existence is that it permits one to
store food surpluses, since storage would be pointless if one didn't remain
nearby to guard the stored food. While some nomadic hunter-gatherers
may occasionally bag more food than they can consume in a few days,
such a bonanza is of little use to them because they cannot protect it.
But stored food is essential for feeding non-food-producing specialists, and
certainly for supporting whole towns of them. Hence nomadic hunter-
gatherer societies have few or no such full-time specialists, who instead
first appear in sedentary societies.
Two types of such specialists are kings and bureaucrats. Hunter-gath-