ZEBRAS AND UNHAPPY MARRIAGES • I 6 I
12. Yak. Wild ancestor: the wild yak of the Himalayas and Tibetan pla
teau. Still confined as a domestic animal to that area.
13. Bali cattle. Wild ancestor: the banteng (a relative of the aurochs) of
Southeast Asia. Still confined as a domestic animal to that area.
14. Mithan. Wild ancestor: the gaur (another relative of the aurochs) of
Indian and Burma. Still confined as a domestic animal to that area.
compare wolves, the wild ancestors of domestic dogs, with the many
breeds of dogs. Some dogs are much bigger than wolves (Great Danes),
while others are much smaller (Pekingese). Some are slimmer and built for
racing (greyhounds), while others are short-legged and useless for racing
(dachshunds). They vary enormously in hair form and color, and some
are even hairless. Polynesians and Aztecs developed dog breeds specifically
raised for food. Comparing a dachshund with a wolf, you wouldn't even
suspect that the former had been derived from the latter if you didn't
already know it.
THE WILD ANCESTORS of the Ancient Fourteen were spread unevenly
over the globe. South America had only one such ancestor, which gave rise
to the llama and alpaca. North America, Australia, and sub-Saharan
Africa had none at all. The lack of domestic mammals indigenous to sub-
Saharan Africa is especially astonishing, since a main reason why tourists
visit Africa today is to see its abundant and diverse wild mammals. In
contrast, the wild ancestors of 13 of the Ancient Fourteen (including all of
the Major Five) were confined to Eurasia. (As elsewhere in this book, my
use of the term "Eurasia" includes in several cases North Africa, which
biogeographically and in many aspects of human culture is more closely
related to Eurasia than to sub-Saharan Africa.)
Of course, not all 13 of these wild ancestral species occurred together
throughout Eurasia. No area had all 13, and some of the wild ancestors
were quite local, such as the yak, confined in the wild to Tibet and adjacent
highland areas. However, many parts of Eurasia did have quite a few of
these 13 species living together in the same area: for example, seven of the
wild ancestors occurred in Southwest Asia.
This very unequal distribution of wild ancestral species among the con-