YALI'S QUESTION • 27
research. However, throughout my school and undergraduate years, my
training was mainly in languages, history, and writing. Even after deciding
to obtain a Ph.D. in physiology, I nearly dropped out of science during my
first year of graduate school to become a linguist.
Since completing my Ph.D. in 1961, I have divided my scientific
research efforts between two fields: molecular physiology on the one hand,
evolutionary biology and biogeography on the other hand. As an unfore
seen bonus for the purposes of this book, evolutionary biology is a histori
cal science forced to use methods different from those of the laboratory
sciences. That experience has made the difficulties in devising a scientific
approach to human history familiar to me. Living in Europe from 1958 to
1962, among European friends whose lives had been brutally traumatized
by 20th-century European history, made me start to think more seriously
about how chains of causes operate in history's unfolding.
For the last 33 years my fieldwork as an evolutionary biologist has
brought me into close contact with a wide range of human societies. My
specialty is bird evolution, which I have studied in South America, south
ern Africa, Indonesia, Australia, and especially New Guinea. Through liv
ing with native peoples of these areas, I have become familiar with many
technologically primitive human societies, from those of hunter-gatherers
to those of tribal farmers and fishing peoples who depended until recently
on stone tools. Thus, what most literate people would consider strange
lifestyles of remote prehistory are for me the most vivid part of my life.
New Guinea, though it accounts for only a small fraction of the world's
land area, encompasses a disproportionate fraction of its human diversity.
Of the modern world's 6,000 languages, 1,000 are confined to New
Guinea. In the course of my work on New Guinea birds, my interests in
language were rekindled, by the need to elicit lists of local names of bird
species in nearly 100 of those New Guinea languages.
Out of all those interests grew my most recent book, a nontechnical
account of human evolution entitled The Third Chimpanzee. Its Chapter
14, called "Accidental Conquerors," sought to understand the outcome
of the encounter between Europeans and Native Americans. After I had
completed that book, I realized that other modern, as well as prehistoric,
encounters between peoples raised similar questions. I saw that the ques
tion with which I had wrestled in that Chapter 14 was in essence the ques
tion Yali had asked me in 1972, merely transferred to a different part of