204 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
by a sailor on the whaling ship Active killed 51 out of the 56 Sadlermiut
Eskimos, a very isolated band of people living on Southampton Island in
the Canadian Arctic. In addition, measles and some of our other "child
hood" diseases are more likely to kill infected adults than children, and all
adults in the tribelet are susceptible. (In contrast, modern Americans rarely
contract measles as adults, because most of them get either measles or the
vaccine against it as children.) Having killed most of the tribelet, the epi
demic then disappears. The small population size of tribelets explains not
only why they can't sustain epidemics introduced from the outside, but
also why they never could evolve epidemic diseases of their own to give
back to visitors.
That's not to say, though, that small human populations are free from
all infectious diseases. They do have infections, but only of certain types.
Some are caused by microbes capable of maintaining themselves in ani
mals or in the soil, with the result that the disease doesn't die out but
remains constantly available to infect people. For example, the yellow
fever virus is carried by African wild monkeys, whence it can always infect
rural human populations of Africa, whence it was carried by the transat
lantic slave trade to infect New World monkeys and people.
Still other infections of small human populations are chronic diseases
such as leprosy and yaws. Since the disease may take a very long time to
kill its victim, the victim remains alive as a reservoir of microbes to infect
other members of the tribelet. For instance, the Karimui Basim of the New
Guinea highlands, where I worked in the 1960s, was occupied by an iso
lated population of a few thousand people, suffering from the world's
highest incidence of leprosy—about 40 percent! Finally, small human pop
ulations are also susceptible to nonfatal infections against which we don't
develop immunity, with the result that the same person can become rein
fected after recovering. That happens with hookworm and many other
parasites.
All these types of diseases, characteristic of small isolated populations,
must be the oldest diseases of humanity. They were the ones we could
evolve and sustain through the early millions of years of our evolutionary
history, when the total human population was tiny and fragmented. These
diseases are also shared with, or similar to the diseases of, our closest wild
relatives, the African great apes. In contrast, the crowd diseases, which we
discussed earlier, could have arisen only with the buildup of large, dense
human populations. That buildup began with the rise of agriculture start-