3 56 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
duction, though the disparity here was less marked than for animal food
production. In 1492 agriculture was widespread in Eurasia. Among the
few Eurasian hunter-gatherers lacking both crops and domestic animals
were the Ainu of northern Japan, Siberian societies without reindeer, and
small hunter-gatherer groups scattered through the forests of India and
tropical Southeast Asia and trading with neighboring farmers. Some other
Eurasian societies, notably the Central Asian pastoralists and the reindeer-
herding Lapps and Samoyeds of the Arctic, had domestic animals but little
or no agriculture. Virtually all other Eurasian societies engaged in agricul
ture as well as in herding animals.
Agriculture was also widespread in the Americas, but hunter-gatherers
occupied a larger fraction of the Americas' area than of Eurasia's. Those
regions of the Americas without food production included all of northern
North America and southern South America, the Canadian Great Plains,
and all of western North America except for small areas of the U.S. South
west that supported irrigation agriculture. It is striking that the areas of
Native America without food production included what today, after Euro
peans' arrival, are some of the most productive farmlands and pastures of
both North and South America: the Pacific states of the United States,
Canada's wheat belt, the pampas of Argentina, and the Mediterranean
zone of Chile. The former absence of food production in these lands was
due entirely to their local paucity of domesticable wild animals and plants,
and to geographic and ecological barriers that prevented the crops and the
few domestic animal species of other parts of the Americas from arriving.
Those lands became productive not only for European settlers but also, in
some cases, for Native Americans, as soon as Europeans introduced suit
able domestic animals and crops. For instance, Native American societies
became renowned for their mastery of horses, and in some cases of cattle
and sheepherding, in parts of the Great Plains, the western United States,
and the Argentine pampas. Those mounted plains warriors and Navajo
sheepherders and weavers now figure prominently in white Americans'
image of American Indians, but the basis for that image was created only
after 1492. These examples demonstrate that the sole missing ingredients
required to sustain food production in large areas of the Americas were
domestic animals and crops themselves.
In those parts of the Americas that did support Native American agri
culture, it was constrained by five major disadvantages vis-a-vis Eurasian
agriculture: widespread dependence on protein-poor corn, instead of