290 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
when threatened with destruction by powerful external forces. In much
the same way, in an example of state formation described in every Ameri
can history textbook, the white American colonies themselves, one of
which (Georgia) had precipitated the formation of the Cherokee state,
were impelled to form a nation of their own when threatened with the
powerful external force of the British monarchy. The American colonies
were initially as jealous of their autonomy as the Cherokee chiefdoms, and
their first attempt at amalgamation under the Articles of Confederation
(1781) proved unworkable because it reserved too much autonomy to the
ex-colonies. Only further threats, notably Shays's Rebellion of 1786 and
the unsolved burden of war debt, overcame the ex-colonies' extreme reluc
tance to sacrifice autonomy and pushed them into adopting our current
strong federal constitution in 1787. The 19th-century unification of Ger
many's jealous principalities proved equally difficult. Three early attempts
(the Frankfurt Parliament of 1848, the restored German Confederation of
1850, and the North German Confederation of 1866) failed before the
external threat of France's declaration of war in 1870 finally led to the
princelets' surrendering much of their power to a central imperial German
government in 1871.
The other mode of formation of complex societies, besides merger
under threat of external force, is merger by conquest. A well-documented
example is the origin of the Zulu state, in southeastern Africa. When first
observed by white settlers, the Zulus were divided into dozens of little
chiefdoms. During the late 1700s, as population pressure rose, fighting
between the chiefdoms became increasingly intense. Among all those chief
doms, the ubiquitous problem of devising centralized power structures
was solved most successfully by a chief called Dingiswayo, who gained
ascendancy of the Mtetwa chiefdom by killing a rival around 1807. Din
giswayo developed a superior centralized military organization by drafting
young men from all villages and grouping them into regiments by age
rather than by their village. He also developed superior centralized politi
cal organization by abstaining from slaughter as he conquered other chief
doms, leaving the conquered chief's family intact, and limiting himself to
replacing the conquered chief himself with a relative willing to cooperate
with Dingiswayo. He developed superior centralized conflict resolution by
expanding the adjudication of quarrels. In that way Dingiswayo was able
to conquer and begin the integration of 30 other Zulu chiefdoms. His suc-