28 • PROLOGUE
the world. And so at last, with the help of many friends, I shall attempt to
satisfy Yali's curiosity—and my own.
THIS BOOK'S CHAPTERS are divided into four parts. Part 1, entitled
"From Eden to Cajamarca," consists of three chapters. Chapter 1 provides
a whirlwind tour of human evolution and history, extending from our
divergence from apes, around 7 million years ago, until the end of the last
Ice Age, around 13,000 years ago. We shall trace the spread of ancestral
humans, from our origins in Africa to the other continents, in order to
understand the state of the world just before the events often lumped into
the term "rise of civilization" began. It turns out that human development
on some continents got a head start in time over developments on others.
Chapter 2 prepares us for exploring effects of continental environments
on history over the past 13,000 years, by briefly examining effects of island
environments on history over smaller time scales and areas. When ances
tral Polynesians spread into the Pacific around 3,200 years ago, they
encountered islands differing greatly in their environments. Within a few
millennia that single ancestral Polynesian society had spawned on those
diverse islands a range of diverse daughter societies, from hunter-gatherer
tribes to proto-empires. That radiation can serve as a model for the longer,
larger-scale, and less understood radiation of societies on different conti
nents since the end of the last Ice Age, to become variously hunter-gatherer
tribes and empires.
The third chapter introduces us to collisions between peoples from dif
ferent continents, by retelling through contemporary eyewitness accounts
the most dramatic such encounter in history: the capture of the last inde
pendent Inca emperor, Atahuallpa, in the presence of his whole army, by
Francisco Pizarro and his tiny band of conquistadores, at the Peruvian city
of Cajamarca. We can identify the chain of proximate factors that enabled
Pizarro to capture Atahuallpa, and that operated in European conquests
of other Native American societies as well. Those factors included Spanish
germs, horses, literacy, political organization, and technology (especially
ships and weapons). That analysis of proximate causes is the easy part of
this book; the hard part is to identify the ultimate causes leading to them
and to the actual outcome, rather than to the opposite possible outcome
of Atahuallpa's coming to Madrid and capturing King Charles I of Spain.
Part 2, entitled "The Rise and Spread of Food Production" and con-