1 84 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
known as tropical rain forest is confined to within about 10 degrees lati
tude of the equator, while Mediterranean scrub habitats (such as Califor
nia's chaparral and Europe's maquis) lie between about 30 and 40 degrees
of latitude.
But the germination, growth, and disease resistance of plants are
adapted to precisely those features of climate. Seasonal changes of day
length, temperature, and rainfall constitute signals that stimulate seeds to
germinate, seedlings to grow, and mature plants to develop flowers, seeds,
and fruit. Each plant population becomes genetically programmed,
through natural selection, to respond appropriately to signals of the sea
sonal regime under which it has evolved. Those regimes vary greatly with
latitude. For example, day length is constant throughout the year at the
equator, but at temperate latitudes it increases as the months advance from
the winter solstice to the summer solstice, and it then declines again
through the next half of the year. The growing season—that is, the months
with temperatures and day lengths suitable for plant growth—is shortest
at high latitudes and longest toward the equator. Plants are also adapted
to the diseases prevalent at their latitude.
Woe betide the plant whose genetic program is mismatched to the lati
tude of the field in which it is planted! Imagine a Canadian farmer foolish
enough to plant a race of corn adapted to growing farther south, in Mex
ico. The unfortunate corn plant, following its Mexico-adapted genetic pro
gram, would prepare to thrust up its shoots in March, only to find itself
still buried under 10 feet of snow. Should the plant become genetically
reprogrammed so as to germinate at a time more appropriate to Canada—
say, late June—the plant would still be in trouble for other reasons. Its
genes would be telling it to grow at a leisurely rate, sufficient only to bring
it to maturity in five months. That's a perfectly safe strategy in Mexico's
mild climate, but in Canada a disastrous one that would guarantee the
plant's being killed by autumn frosts before it had produced any mature
corn cobs. The plant would also lack genes for resistance to diseases of
northern climates, while uselessly carrying genes for resistance to diseases
of southern climates. All those features make low-latitude plants poorly
adapted to high-latitude conditions, and vice versa. As a consequence,
most Fertile Crescent crops grow well in France and Japan but poorly at
the equator.
Animals too are adapted to latitude-related features of climate. In that
respect we are typical animals, as we know by introspection. Some of us