FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 2 79
chiefdoms. They continue the increase in size from bands to tribes to chief
doms. Whereas chiefdoms' populations range from a few thousand to a
few tens of thousands, the populations of most modern states exceed one
million, and China's exceeds one billion. The paramount chief's location
may become the state's capital city. Other population centers of states out
side the capital may also qualify as true cities, which are lacking in chief
doms. Cities differ from villages in their monumental public works,
palaces of rulers, accumulation of capital from tribute or taxes, and con
centration of people other than food producers.
Early states had a hereditary leader with a title equivalent to king, like
a super paramount chief and exercising an even greater monopoly of infor
mation, decision making, and power. Even in democracies today, crucial
knowledge is available to only a few individuals, who control the flow of
information to the rest of the government and consequently control deci
sions. For instance, in the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1963, information and
discussions that determined whether nuclear war would engulf half a bil
lion people were initially confined by President Kennedy to a ten-member
executive committee of the National Security Council that he himself
appointed; then he limited final decisions to a four-member group con
sisting of himself and three of his cabinet ministers.
Central control is more far-reaching, and economic redistribution in the
form of tribute (renamed taxes) more extensive, in states than in chief
doms. Economic specialization is more extreme, to the point where today
not even farmers remain self-sufficient. Hence the effect on society is cata
strophic when state government collapses, as happened in Britain upon the
removal of Roman troops, administrators, and coinage between A.D. 407
and 411. Even the earliest Mesopotamian states exercised centralized con
trol of their economies. Their food was produced by four specialist groups
(cereal farmers, herders, fishermen, and orchard and garden growers),
from each of which the state took the produce and to each of which it gave
out the necessary supplies, tools, and foods other than the type of food
that this group produced. The state supplied seeds and plow animals to
the cereal farmers, took wool from the herders, exchanged the wool by
long-distance trade for metal and other essential raw materials, and paid
out food rations to the laborers who maintained the irrigation systems on
which the farmers depended.
Many, perhaps most, early states adopted slavery on a much larger scale
than did chiefdoms. That was not because chiefdoms were more kindly