YAM'S QUESTION • 19
sidered evolutionary vestiges of human descent from apelike ancestors.
The displacement of such peoples by colonists from industrialized societies
exemplified the survival of the fittest. With the later rise of genetics, the
explanations were recast once again, in genetic terms. Europeans became
considered genetically more intelligent than Africans, and especially more
so than Aboriginal Australians.
Today, segments of Western society publicly repudiate racism. Yet many
(perhaps most!) Westerners continue to accept racist explanations pri
vately or subconsciously. In Japan and many other countries, such expla
nations are still advanced publicly and without apology. Even educated
white Americans, Europeans, and Australians, when the subject of Austra
lian Aborigines comes up, assume that there is something primitive about
the Aborigines themselves. They certainly look different from whites.
Many of the living descendants of those Aborigines who survived the era
of European colonization are now finding it difficult to succeed economi
cally in white Australian society.
A seemingly compelling argument goes as follows. White immigrants to
Australia built a literate, industrialized, politically centralized, democratic
state based on metal tools and on food production, all within a century of
colonizing a continent where the Aborigines had been living as tribal
hunter-gatherers without metal for at least 40,000 years. Here were two
successive experiments in human development, in which the environment
was identical and the sole variable was the people occupying that environ
ment. What further proof could be wanted to establish that the differences
between Aboriginal Australian and European societies arose from differ
ences between the peoples themselves?
The objection to such racist explanations is not just that they are loath
some, but also that they are wrong. Sound evidence for the existence of
human differences in intelligence that parallel human differences in tech
nology is lacking. In fact, as I shall explain in a moment, modern "Stone
Age" peoples are on the average probably more intelligent, not less intelli
gent, than industrialized peoples. Paradoxical as it may sound, we shall
see in Chapter 15 that white immigrants to Australia do not deserve the
credit usually accorded to them for building a literate industrialized society
with the other virtues mentioned above. In addition, peoples who until
recently were technologically primitive—such as Aboriginal Australians
and New Guineans—routinely master industrial technologies when given
opportunities to do so.