UP TO THE STARTING LINE " 41
leaving behind little or no evidence of hybridization between Neanderthals
and Cro-Magnons.
THE GREAT LEAP Forward coincides with the first proven major exten
sion of human geographic range since our ancestors' colonization of
Eurasia. That extension consisted of the occupation of Australia and New
Guinea, joined at that time into a single continent. Many radiocarbon-
dated sites attest to human presence in Australia / New Guinea between
40,000 and 30,000 years ago (plus the inevitable somewhat older claims
of contested validity). Within a short time of that initial peopling, humans
had expanded over the whole continent and adapted to its diverse habitats,
from the tropical rain forests and high mountains of New Guinea to the
dry interior and wet southeastern corner of Australia.
During the Ice Ages, so much of the oceans' water was locked up in
glaciers that worldwide sea levels dropped hundreds of feet below their
present stand. As a result, what are now the shallow seas between Asia
and the Indonesian islands of Sumatra, Borneo, Java, and Bali became dry
land. (So did other shallow straits, such as the Bering Strait and the English
Channel.) The edge of the Southeast Asian mainland then lay 700 miles
east of its present location. Nevertheless, central Indonesian islands
between Bali and Australia remained surrounded and separated by deep-
water channels. To reach Australia / New Guinea from the Asian mainland
at that time still required crossing a minimum of eight channels, the broad
est of which was at least 50 miles wide. Most of those channels divided
islands visible from each other, but Australia itself was always invisible
from even the nearest Indonesian islands, Timor and Tanimbar. Thus, the
occupation of Australia / New Guinea is momentous in that it demanded
watercraft and provides by far the earliest evidence of their use in history.
Not until about 30,000 years later (13,000 years ago) is there strong evi
dence of watercraft anywhere else in the world, from the Mediterranean.
Initially, archaeologists considered the possibility that the colonization
of Australia / New Guinea was achieved accidentally by just a few people
swept to sea while fishing on a raft near an Indonesian island. In an
extreme scenario the first settlers are pictured as having consisted of a
single pregnant young woman carrying a male fetus. But believers in the
fluke-colonization theory have been surprised by recent discoveries that
still other islands, lying to the east of New Guinea, were colonized soon