HOW AFRICA BECAME BLACK • 3 99
It's true, of course, that some large African animals have occasionally
been tamed. Hannibal enlisted tamed African elephants in his unsuccessful
war against Rome, and ancient Egyptians may have tamed giraffes and
other species. But none of those tamed animals was actually domesti
cated—that is, selectively bred in captivity and genetically modified so as
to become more useful to humans. Had Africa's rhinos and hippos been
domesticated and ridden, they would not only have fed armies but also
have provided an unstoppable cavalry to cut through the ranks of Euro
pean horsemen. Rhino-mounted Bantu shock troops could have over
thrown the Roman Empire. It never happened.
A second factor is a corresponding, though less extreme, disparity
between sub-Saharan Africa and Eurasia in domesticable plants. The
Sahel, Ethiopia, and West Africa did yield indigenous crops, but many
fewer varieties than grew in Eurasia. Because of the limited variety of wild
starting material suitable for plant domestication, even Africa's earliest
agriculture may have begun several thousand years later than that of the
Fertile Crescent.
Thus, as far as plant and animal domestication was concerned, the head
start and high diversity lay with Eurasia, not with Africa. A third factor is
that Africa's area is only about half that of Eurasia. Furthermore, only
about one-third of its area falls within the sub-Saharan zone north of the
equator that was occupied by farmers and herders before 1000 B.C. Today,
the total population of Africa is less than 700 million, compared with 4
billion for Eurasia. But, all other things being equal, more land and more
people mean more competing societies and inventions, hence a faster pace
of development.
The remaining factor behind Africa's slower rate of post-Pleistocene
development compared with Eurasia's is the different orientation of the
main axes of these continents. Like that of the Americas, Africa's major
axis is north-south, whereas Eurasia's is east-west (Figure 10.1). As one
moves along a north-south axis, one traverses zones differing greatly in
climate, habitat, rainfall, day length, and diseases of crops and livestock.
Hence crops and animals domesticated or acquired in one part of Africa
had great difficulty in moving to other parts. In contrast, crops and ani
mals moved easily between Eurasian societies thousands of miles apart but
at the same latitude and sharing similar climates and day lengths.
The slow passage or complete halt of crops and livestock along Africa's
north-south axis had important consequences. For example, the Mediter-