LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK • 1 99
instead hitchhike in the saliva of an insect that bites the old host and flies
off to find a new host. The free ride may be provided by mosquitoes, fleas,
lice, or tsetse flies that spread malaria, plague, typhus, or sleeping sickness,
respectively. The dirtiest of all tricks for passive carriage is perpetrated by
microbes that pass from a woman to her fetus and thereby infect babies
already at birth. By playing that trick, the microbes responsible for syphi
lis, rubella, and now AIDS pose ethical dilemmas with which believers in
a fundamentally just universe have had to struggle desperately.
Other germs take matters into their own hands, figuratively speaking.
They modify the anatomy or habits of their host in such a way as to accel
erate their transmission. From our perspective, the open genital sores
caused by venereal diseases like syphilis are a vile indignity. From the
microbes' point of view, however, they're just a useful device to enlist a
host's help in inoculating microbes into a body cavity of a new host. The
skin lesions caused by smallpox similarly spread microbes by direct or
indirect body contact (occasionally very indirect, as when U.S. whites bent
on wiping out "belligerent" Native Americans sent them gifts of blankets
previously used by smallpox patients).
More vigorous yet is the strategy practiced by the influenza, common
cold, and pertussis (whooping cough) microbes, which induce the victim
to cough or sneeze, thereby launching a cloud of microbes toward prospec
tive new hosts. Similarly, the cholera bacterium induces in its victim a mas
sive diarrhea that delivers bacteria into the water supplies of potential new
victims, while the virus responsible for Korean hemorrhagic fever broad
casts itself in the urine of mice. For modification of a host's behavior, noth
ing matches rabies virus, which not only gets into the saliva of an infected
dog but drives the dog into a frenzy of biting and thus infecting many new
victims. But for physical effort on the bug's own part, the prize still goes
to worms such as hookworms and schistosomes, which actively burrow
through a host's skin from the water or soil into which their larvae had
been excreted in a previous victim's feces.
Thus, from our point of view, genital sores, diarrhea, and coughing are
"symptoms of disease." From a germ's point of view, they're clever evolu
tionary strategies to broadcast the germ. That's why it's in the germ's inter
ests to "make us sick." But why should a germ evolve the apparently self-
defeating strategy of killing its host?
From the germ's perspective, that's just an unintended by-product (fat
consolation to us!) of host symptoms promoting efficient transmission of