NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 49
industry was churning out vacuum tube models and reluctant to compete
with its own products. Why were British cities still using gas street lighting
into the 1920s, long after U.S. and German cities had converted to electric
street lighting? Because British municipal governments had invested heav
ily in gas lighting and placed regulatory obstacles in the way of the compet
ing electric light companies.
The remaining consideration affecting acceptance of new technologies
is the ease with which their advantages can be observed. In A.D. 1340,
when firearms had not yet reached most of Europe, England's earl of
Derby and earl of Salisbury happened to be present in Spain at the battle
of Tarifa, where Arabs used cannons against the Spaniards. Impressed by
what they saw, the earls introduced cannons to the English army, which
adopted them enthusiastically and already used them against French sol
diers at the battle of Crecy six years later.
THUS, WHEELS, DESIGNER jeans, and QWERTY keyboards illustrate
the varied reasons why the same society is not equally receptive to all
inventions. Conversely, the same invention's reception also varies greatly
among contemporary societies. We are all familiar with the supposed gen
eralization that rural Third World societies are less receptive to innovation
than are Westernized industrial societies. Even within the industrialized
world, some areas are much more receptive than others. Such differences,
if they existed on a continental scale, might explain why technology devel
oped faster on some continents than on others. For instance, if all Aborigi
nal Australian societies were for some reason uniformly resistant to
change, that might account for their continued use of stone tools after
metal tools had appeared on every other continent. How do differences in
receptivity among societies arise?
A laundry list of at least 14 explanatory factors has been proposed by
historians of technology. One is long life expectancy, which in principle
should give prospective inventors the years necessary to accumulate tech
nical knowledge, as well as the patience and security to embark on long
development programs yielding delayed rewards. Hence the greatly
increased life expectancy brought by modern medicine may have contrib
uted to the recently accelerating pace of invention.
The next five factors involve economics or the organization of society:
(1) The availability of cheap slave labor in classical times supposedly dis-