4 4° " FURTHER READINGS
and Peoples (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1976). The last book, written
by a distinguished historian rather than by a physician, has been especially
influential in bringing historians to recognize the impacts of disease, as
have been the two books by Alfred Crosby listed under the further read
ings for the Prologue.
Friedrich Vogel and Arno Motulsky, Human Genetics, 2nd ed. (Berlin:
Springer, 1986), the standard textbook on human genetics, is a convenient
reference for natural selection of human populations by disease, and for
the development of genetic resistance against specific diseases. Roy Ander
son and Robert May, Infectious Diseases of Humans (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1992), is a clear mathematical treatment of disease
dynamics, transmission, and epidemiology. MacFarlane Burnet, Natural
History of Infectious Disease (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1953), is a classic by a distinguished medical researcher, while Arno Kar-
len, Man and Microbes (New York: Putnam, 1995), is a recent popular
account.
Books and articles specifically concerned with the evolution of human
infectious diseases include Aidan Cockburn, Infectious Diseases: Their
Evolution and Eradication (Springfield, 111.: Thomas, 1967); the same
author's "Where did our infectious diseases come from?" pp. 103-13 in
Health and Disease in Tribal Societies, CIBA Foundation Symposium, no.
49 (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1977); George Williams and Randolph Nesse,
"The dawn of Darwinian medicine," Quarterly Reviews of Biology 66:1-
62 (1991); and Paul Ewald, Evolution of Infectious Disease (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1994).
Francis Black, "Infectious diseases in primitive societies," Science
187:515-18 (1975), discusses the differences between endemic and acute
diseases in their impact on, and maintenance in, small isolated societies.
Frank Fenner, "Myxoma virus and Oryctolagus cuniculus: Two colonizing
species," pp. 485-501 in H. G. Baker and G. L. Stebbins, eds., Genetics
of Colonizing Species (New York: Academic Press, 1965), describes the
spread and evolution of Myxoma virus among Australian rabbits. Peter
Panum, Observations Made during the Epidemic of Measles on the Faroe
Islands in the Year 1846 (New York: American Public Health Association,
1940), illustrates how the arrival of an acute epidemic disease in an iso
lated nonresistant population quickly kills or immunizes the whole popu
lation. Francis Black, "Measles endemicity in insular populations: Critical
community size and its evolutionary implication," Journal of Theoretical