160 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
TABLE 9.1 The Ancient Fourteen Species of Big Herbivorous
Domestic Mammals
The Major Five
1. Sheep. Wild ancestor: the Asiatic mouflon sheep of West and Central
Asia. Now worldwide.
2. Goat. Wild ancestor: the bezoar goat of West Asia. Now worldwide.
3. Cow, alias ox or cattle. Wild ancestor: the now extinct aurochs, for
merly distributed over Eurasia and North Africa. Now worldwide.
4. Pig. Wild ancestor: the wild boar, distributed over Eurasia and North
Africa. Now worldwide. Actually an omnivore (regularly eats both animal and
plant food), whereas the other 13 of the Ancient Fourteen are more strictly
herbivores.
5. Horse. Wild ancestor: now extinct wild horses of southern Russia; a
different subspecies of the same species survived in the wild to modern times
as Przewalski's horse of Mongolia. Now worldwide.
The Minor Nine
6. Arabian (one-humped) camel. Wild ancestor: now extinct, formerly
lived in Arabia and adjacent areas. Still largely restricted to Arabia and north
ern Africa, though feral in Australia.
7. Bactrian (two-humped) camel: Wild ancestor: now extinct, lived in
Central Asia. Still largely confined to Central Asia.
8. Llama and alpaca. These appear to be well-differentiated breeds of the
same species, rather than different species. Wild ancestor: the guanaco of the
Andes. Still largely confined to the Andes, although some are bred as pack
animals in North America.
9. Donkey. Wild ancestor: the African wild ass of North Africa and for
merly perhaps the adjacent area of Southwest Asia. Originally confined as a
domestic animal to North Africa and western Eurasia, more recently also
used elsewhere.
10. Reindeer. Wild ancestor: the reindeer of northern Eurasia. Still largely
confined as a domestic animal to that area, though now some are also used in
Alaska.
11. Water buffalo. Wild ancestor lives in Southeast Asia. Still used as a
domestic animal mainly in that area, though many are also used in Brazil and
others have escaped to the wild in Australia and other places.