214 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
killed by epidemics beginning with the first European visit, in 1791). Syph
ilis, gonorrhea, tuberculosis, and influenza arriving with Captain Cook in
1779, followed by a big typhoid epidemic in 1804 and numerous "minor"
epidemics, reduced Hawaii's population from around half a million in
1779 to 84,000 in 1853, the year when smallpox finally reached Hawaii
and killed around 10,000 of the survivors. These examples could be
multiplied almost indefinitely.
However, germs did not act solely to Europeans' advantage. While the
New World and Australia did not harbor native epidemic diseases
awaiting Europeans, tropical Asia, Africa, Indonesia, and New Guinea cer
tainly did. Malaria throughout the tropical Old World, cholera in tropical
Southeast Asia, and yellow fever in tropical Africa were (and still are) the
most notorious of the tropical killers. They posed the most serious obstacle
to European colonization of the tropics, and they explain why the Euro
pean colonial partitioning of New Guinea and most of Africa was not
accomplished until nearly 400 years after European partitioning of the
New World began. Furthermore, once malaria and yellow fever did
become transmitted to the Americas by European ship traffic, they
emerged as the major impediment to colonization of the New World trop
ics as well. A familiar example is the role of those two diseases in aborting
the French effort, and nearly aborting the ultimately successful American
effort, to construct the Panama Canal.
Bearing all these facts in mind, let's try to regain our sense of perspective
about the role of germs in answering Yali's question. There is no doubt
that Europeans developed a big advantage in weaponry, technology, and
political organization over most of the non-European peoples that they
conquered. But that advantage alone doesn't fully explain how initially so
few European immigrants came to supplant so much of the native popula
tion of the Americas and some other parts of the world. That might not
have happened without Europe's sinister gift to other continents—the
germs evolving from Eurasians' long intimacy with domestic animals.