HOW TO MAKE AN ALMOND • 129
learned to deal with tannins in the same way that they dealt with bitter
chemicals in almonds and other wild plants: either by grinding and leach
ing the acorns to remove the tannins, or by harvesting acorns from the
occasional mutant individual oak tree low in tannins.
Why have we failed to domesticate such a prized food source as acorns?
Why did we take so long to domesticate strawberries and raspberries?
What is it about those plants that kept their domestication beyond the
reach of ancient farmers capable of mastering such difficult techniques as
grafting?
It turns out that oak trees have three strikes against them. First, their
slow growth would exhaust the patience of most farmers. Sown wheat
yields a crop within a few months; a planted almond grows into a nut-
bearing tree in three or four years; but a planted acorn may not become
productive for a decade or more. Second, oak trees evolved to make nuts
of a size and taste suitable for squirrels, which we've all seen burying,
digging up, and eating acorns. Oaks grow from the occasional acorn that
a squirrel forgets to dig up. With billions of squirrels each spreading hun
dreds of acorns every year to virtually any spot suitable for oak trees to
grow, we humans didn't stand a chance of selecting oaks for the acorns
that we wanted. Those same problems of slow growth and fast squirrels
probably also explain why beech and hickory trees, heavily exploited as
wild trees for their nuts by Europeans and Native Americans, respectively,
were also not domesticated.
Finally, perhaps the most important difference between almonds and
acorns is that bitterness is controlled by a single dominant gene in almonds
but appears to be controlled by many genes in oaks. If ancient farmers
planted almonds or acorns from the occasional nonbitter mutant tree, the
laws of genetics dictate that half of the nuts from the resulting tree growing
up would also be nonbitter in the case of almonds, but almost all would
still be bitter in the case of oaks. That alone would kill the enthusiasm of
any would-be acorn farmer who had defeated the squirrels and remained
patient.
As for strawberries and raspberries, we had similar trouble competing
with thrushes and other berry-loving birds. Yes, the Romans did tend wild
strawberries in their gardens. But with billions of European thrushes defe
cating wild strawberry seeds in every possible place (including Roman gar
dens), strawberries remained the little berries that thrushes wanted, not
the big berries that humans wanted. Only with the recent development of