226 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
past. But it's still possible to compare newly emerged alphabets of the past
with previously existing ones, and to deduce from letter forms which
existing ones served as models. For the same reason, we can be sure that
the Linear B syllabary of Mycenaean Greece had been adapted by around
1400 B.c. from the Linear A syllabary of Minoan Crete.
At all of the hundreds of times when an existing writing system of one
language has been used as a blueprint to adapt to a different language,
some problems have arisen, because no two languages have exactly the
same sets of sounds. Some inherited letters or signs may simply be
dropped, when the sounds that those letters represent in the lending lan
guage do not exist in the borrowing language. For example, Finnish lacks
the sounds that many other European languages express by the letters b,
c, f, g, w, x, and z, so the Finns dropped these letters from their version of
the Roman alphabet. There has also been a frequent reverse problem, of
devising letters to represent "new" sounds present in the borrowing lan
guage but absent in the lending language. That problem has been solved
in several different ways: such as using an arbitrary combination of two
or more letters (like the English th to represent a sound for which the
Greek and runic alphabets used a single letter); adding a small distinguish
ing mark to an existing letter (like the Spanish tilde n, the German umlaut
6, and the proliferation of marks dancing around Polish and Turkish let
ters); co-opting existing letters for which the borrowing language had no
use (such as modern Czechs recycling the letter c of the Roman alphabet to
express the Czech sound ts); or just inventing a new letter (as our medieval
ancestors did when they created the new letters j, u, and w).
The Roman alphabet itself was the end product of a long sequence of
blueprint copying. Alphabets apparently arose only once in human his
tory: among speakers of Semitic languages, in the area from modern Syria
to the Sinai, during the second millennium B.C. All of the hundreds of
historical and now existing alphabets were ultimately derived from that
ancestral Semitic alphabet, in a few cases (such as the Irish ogham alpha
bet) by idea diffusion, but in most by actual copying and modification of
letter forms.
That evolution of the alphabet can be traced back to Egyptian hiero
glyphs, which included a complete set of 24 signs for the 24 Egyptian
consonants. The Egyptians never took the logical (to us) next step of dis
carding all their logograms, determinatives, and signs for pairs and trios
of consonants, and using just their consonantal alphabet. Starting around