UP TO THE STARTING LINE • 39
than did their Neanderthal contemporaries, they made essentially the same
crude stone tools as Neanderthals, still lacking standardized shapes. They
had no preserved art. To judge from the bone evidence of the animal spe
cies on which they preyed, their hunting skills were unimpressive and
mainly directed at easy-to-kill, not-at-all-dangerous animals. They were
not yet in the business of slaughtering buffalo, pigs, and other dangerous
prey. They couldn't even catch fish: their sites immediately on the seacoast
lack fish bones and fishhooks. They and their Neanderthal contemporaries
still rank as less than fully human.
Human history at last took off around 50,000 years ago, at the time of
what I have termed our Great Leap Forward. The earliest definite signs of
that leap come from East African sites with standardized stone tools and
the first preserved jewelry (ostrich-shell beads). Similar developments soon
appear in the Near East and in southeastern Europe, then (some 40,000
years ago) in southwestern Europe, where abundant artifacts are associ
ated with fully modern skeletons of people termed Cro-Magnons. Thereaf
ter, the garbage preserved at archaeological sites rapidly becomes more
and more interesting and leaves no doubt that we are dealing with biologi
cally and behaviorally modern humans.
Cro-Magnon garbage heaps yield not only stone tools but also tools
of bone, whose suitability for shaping (for instance, into fishhooks) had
apparently gone unrecognized by previous humans. Tools were produced
in diverse and distinctive shapes so modern that their functions as needles,
awls, engraving tools, and so on are obvious to us. Instead of only single-
piece tools such as hand-held scrapers, multipiece tools made their appear
ance. Recognizable multipiece weapons at Cro-Magnon sites include har
poons, spear-throwers, and eventually bows and arrows, the precursors of
rifles and other multipiece modern weapons. Those efficient means of kill
ing at a safe distance permitted the hunting of such dangerous prey as
rhinos and elephants, while the invention of rope for nets, lines, and snares
allowed the addition of fish and birds to our diet. Remains of houses and
sewn clothing testify to a greatly improved ability to survive in cold cli
mates, and remains of jewelry and carefully buried skeletons indicate revo
lutionary aesthetic and spiritual developments.
Of the Cro-Magnons' products that have been preserved, the best
known are their artworks: their magnificent cave paintings, statues, and
musical instruments, which we still appreciate as art today. Anyone who
has experienced firsthand the overwhelming power of the life-sized painted