258 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
be despised, as did other things foreign in Japan after 1600. The samurai-
controlled government began by restricting gun production to a few cities,
then introduced a requirement of a government license for producing a
gun, then issued licenses only for guns produced for the government, and
finally reduced government orders for guns, until Japan was almost with
out functional guns again.
Contemporary European rulers also included some who despised guns
and tried to restrict their availability. But such measures never got far in
Europe, where any country that temporarily swore off firearms would be
promptly overrun by gun-toting neighboring countries. Only because
Japan was a populous, isolated island could it get away with its rejection
of the powerful new military technology. Its safety in isolation came to an
end in 1853, when the visit of Commodore Perry's U.S. fleet bristling with
cannons convinced Japan of its need to resume gun manufacture.
That rejection and China's abandonment of oceangoing ships (as well as
of mechanical clocks and water-driven spinning machines) are well-known
historical instances of technological reversals in isolated or semi-isolated
societies. Other such reversals occurred in prehistoric times. The extreme
case is that of Aboriginal Tasmanians, who abandoned even bone tools
and fishing to become the society with the simplest technology in the mod
ern world (Chapter 15). Aboriginal Australians may have adopted and
then abandoned bows and arrows. Torres Islanders abandoned canoes,
while Gaua Islanders abandoned and then readopted them. Pottery was
abandoned throughout Polynesia. Most Polynesians and many Melane-
sians abandoned the use of bows and arrows in war. Polar Eskimos lost
the bow and arrow and the kayak, while Dorset Eskimos lost the bow and
arrow, bow drill, and dogs.
These examples, at first so bizarre to us, illustrate well the roles of geog
raphy and of diffusion in the history of technology. Without diffusion,
fewer technologies are acquired, and more existing technologies are lost.
BECAUSE TECHNOLOGY BEGETS more technology, the importance of
an invention's diffusion potentially exceeds the importance of the original
invention. Technology's history exemplifies what is termed an autocata¬
lytic process: that is, one that speeds up at a rate that increases with time,
because the process catalyzes itself. The explosion of technology since the
Industrial Revolution impresses us today, but the medieval explosion was