4 8 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
just being a 15,000-year-old lump of charcoal lying next to a stone tool
actually made 9,000 years ago?
To illustrate these problems, consider the following typical example of
an often quoted pre-Clovis claim. At a Brazilian rock shelter named Pedro
Furada, archaeologists found cave paintings undoubtedly made by
humans. They also discovered, among the piles of stones at the base of a
cliff, some stones whose shapes suggested the possibility of their being
crude tools. In addition, they came upon supposed hearths, whose burnt
charcoal yielded radiocarbon dates of around 35,000 years ago. Articles
on Pedro Furada were accepted for publication in the prestigious and
highly selective international scientific journal Nature.
But none of those rocks at the base of the cliff is an obviously human-
made tool, as are Clovis points and Cro-Magnon tools. If hundreds of
thousands of rocks fall from a high cliff over the course of tens of thou
sands of years, many of them will become chipped and broken when they
hit the rocks below, and some will come to resemble crude tools chipped
and broken by humans. In western Europe and elsewhere in Amazonia,
archaeologists have radiocarbon-dated the actual pigments used in cave
paintings, but that was not done at Pedro Furada. Forest fires occur fre
quently in the vicinity and produce charcoal that is regularly swept into
caves by wind and streams. No evidence links the 35,000-year-old char
coal to the undoubted cave paintings at Pedro Furada. Although the origi
nal excavators remain convinced, a team of archaeologists who were not
involved in the excavation but receptive to pre-Clovis claims recently vis
ited the site and came away unconvinced.
The North American site that currently enjoys the strongest credentials
as a possible pre-Clovis site is Meadowcroft rock shelter, in Pennsylvania,
yielding reported human-associated radiocarbon dates of about 16,000
years ago. At Meadowcroft no archaeologist denies that many human arti
facts do occur in many carefully excavated layers. But the oldest radiocar
bon dates don't make sense, because the plant and animal species
associated with them are species living in Pennsylvania in recent times of
mild climates, rather than species expected for the glacial times of 16,000
years ago. Hence one has to suspect that the charcoal samples dated from
the oldest human occupation levels consist of post-Clovis charcoal infil
trated with older carbon. The strongest pre-Clovis candidate in South
America is the Monte Verde site, in southern Chile, dated to at least