236 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
ble only to scribes and read only in palaces, Greek alphabetic writing from
the moment of its appearance was a vehicle of poetry and humor, to be
read in private homes. For instance, the first preserved example of Greek
alphabetic writing, scratched onto an Athenian wine jug of about 740 B.C.,
is a line of poetry announcing a dancing contest: "Whoever of all dancers
performs most nimbly will win this vase as a prize." The next example is
three lines of dactylic hexameter scratched onto a drinking cup: "I am
Nestor's delicious drinking cup. Whoever drinks from this cup swiftly will
the desire of fair-crowned Aphrodite seize him." The earliest preserved
examples of the Etruscan and Roman alphabets are also inscriptions on
drinking cups and wine containers. Only later did the alphabet's easily
learned vehicle of private communication become co-opted for public or
bureaucratic purposes. Thus, the developmental sequence of uses for
alphabetic writing was the reverse of that for the earlier systems of logo
grams and syllabaries.
THE LIMITED USES and users of early writing suggest why writing
appeared so late in human evolution. All of the likely or possible indepen
dent inventions of writing (in Sumer, Mexico, China, and Egypt), and all
of the early adaptations of those invented systems (for example, those in
Crete, Iran, Turkey, the Indus Valley, and the Maya area), involved socially
stratified societies with complex and centralized political institutions,
whose necessary relation to food production we shall explore in a later
chapter. Early writing served the needs of those political institutions (such
as record keeping and royal propaganda), and the users were full-time
bureaucrats nourished by stored food surpluses grown by food-producing
peasants. Writing was never developed or even adopted by hunter-gatherer
societies, because they lacked both the institutional uses of early writing
and the social and agricultural mechanisms for generating the food sur
pluses required to feed scribes.
Thus, food production and thousands of years of societal evolution fol
lowing its adoption were as essential for the evolution of writing as for
the evolution of microbes causing human epidemic diseases. Writing arose
independently only in the Fertile Crescent, Mexico, and probably China
precisely because those were the first areas where food production emerged
in their respective hemispheres. Once writing had been invented by those