120 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
berry pickers caused changes either by harvesting available plants while
other plants remained unavailable for invisible reasons, or by changing the
selective conditions acting on plants.
The first such change affected wild mechanisms for the dispersal of
seeds. Many plants have specialized mechanisms that scatter seeds (and
thereby prevent humans from gathering them efficiently). Only mutant
seeds lacking those mechanisms would have been harvested and would
thus have become the progenitors of crops.
A clear example involves peas, whose seeds (the peas we eat) come
enclosed in a pod. Wild peas have to get out of the pod if they are to
germinate. To achieve that result, pea plants evolved a gene that makes the
pod explode, shooting out the peas onto the ground. Pods of occasional
mutant peas don't explode. In the wild the mutant peas would die
entombed in their pod on their parent plants, and only the popping pods
would pass on their genes. But, conversely, the only pods available to
humans to harvest would be the nonpopping ones left on the plant. Thus,
once humans began bringing wild peas home to eat, there was immediate
selection for that single-gene mutant. Similar nonpopping mutants were
selected in lentils, flax, and poppies.
Instead of being enclosed in a poppable pod, wild wheat and barley
seeds grow at the top of a stalk that spontaneously shatters, dropping the
seeds to the ground where they can germinate. A single-gene mutation
prevents the stalks from shattering. In the wild that mutation would be
lethal to the plant, since the seeds would remain suspended in the air,
unable to germinate and take root. But those mutant seeds would have
been the ones waiting conveniently on the stalk to be harvested and
brought home by humans. When humans then planted those harvested
mutant seeds, any mutant seeds among the progeny again became avail
able to the farmers to harvest and sow, while normal seeds among the
progeny fell to the ground and became unavailable. Thus, human farmers
reversed the direction of natural selection by 180 degrees: the formerly
successful gene suddenly became lethal, and the lethal mutant became suc
cessful. Over 10,000 years ago, that unconscious selection for nonshat-
tering wheat and barley stalks was apparently the first major human
"improvement" in any plant. That change marked the beginning of agri
culture in the Fertile Crescent.
The second type of change was even less visible to ancient hikers. For
annual plants growing in an area with a very unpredictable climate, it