1 58 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
plant species seemingly suitable for domestication were never domesti
cated, we shall now tackle the corresponding question for domestic mam
mals. Our former question about apples or Indians becomes a question of
zebras or Africans.
IN CHAPTER 4 we reminded ourselves of the many ways in which big
domestic mammals were crucial to those human societies possessing them.
Most notably, they provided meat, milk products, fertilizer, land trans
port, leather, military assault vehicles, plow traction, and wool, as well as
germs that killed previously unexposed peoples.
In addition, of course, small domestic mammals and domestic birds and
insects have also been useful to humans. Many birds were domesticated
for meat, eggs, and feathers: the chicken in China, various duck and goose
species in parts of Eurasia, turkeys in Mesoamerica, guinea fowl in Africa,
and the Muscovy duck in South America. Wolves were domesticated in
Eurasia and North America to become our dogs used as hunting compan
ions, sentinels, pets, and, in some societies, food. Rodents and other small
mammals domesticated for food included the rabbit in Europe, the guinea
pig in the Andes, a giant rat in West Africa, and possibly a rodent called
the hutia on Caribbean islands. Ferrets were domesticated in Europe to
hunt rabbits, and cats were domesticated in North Africa and Southwest
Asia to hunt rodent pests. Small mammals domesticated as recently as the
19th and 20th centuries include foxes, mink, and chinchillas grown for
fur and hamsters kept as pets. Even some insects have been domesticated,
notably Eurasia's honeybee and China's silkworm moth, kept for honey
and silk, respectively.
Many of these small animals thus yielded food, clothing, or warmth.
But none of them pulled plows or wagons, none bore riders, none except
dogs pulled sleds or became war machines, and none of them have been as
important for food as have big domestic mammals. Hence the rest of this
chapter will confine itself to the big mammals.
THE IMPORTANCE OF domesticated mammals rests on surprisingly few
species of big terrestrial herbivores. (Only terrestrial mammals have been
domesticated, for the obvious reason that aquatic mammals were difficult
to maintain and breed until the development of modern Sea World facili-