208 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
However, the epidemic dies out for any of several reasons, such as being
cured by modern medicine, or being stopped when everybody around has
already been infected and either becomes immune or dies. For example, a
previously unknown fever termed O'nyong-nyong fever appeared in East
Africa in 1959 and proceeded to infect several million Africans. It proba
bly arose from a virus of monkeys and was transmitted to humans by
mosquitoes. The fact that patients recovered quickly and became immune
to further attack helped the new disease die out quickly. Closer to home
for Americans, Fort Bragg fever was the name applied to a new leptospiral
disease that broke out in the United States in the summer of 1942 and
soon disappeared.
A fatal disease vanishing for another reason was New Guinea's laughing
sickness, transmitted by cannibalism and caused by a slow-acting virus
from which no one has ever recovered. Kuru was on its way to exterminat
ing New Guinea's Fore tribe of 20,000 people, until the establishment of
Australian government control around 1959 ended cannibalism and
thereby the transmission of kuru. The annals of medicine are full of
accounts of diseases that sound like no disease known today, but that once
caused terrifying epidemics and then disappeared as mysteriously as they
had come. The "English sweating sickness," which swept and terrified
Europe between 1485 and 1552, and the "Picardy sweats" of 18th- and
19th-century France, are just two of the many epidemic illnesses that van
ished long before modern medicine had devised methods for identifying
the responsible microbes.
A third stage in the evolution of our major diseases is represented by
former animal pathogens that did establish themselves in humans, that
have not (not yet?) died out, and that may or may not still become major
killers of humanity. The future remains very uncertain for Lassa fever,
caused by a virus derived probably from rodents. Lassa fever was first
observed in 1969 in Nigeria, where it causes a fatal illness so contagious
that Nigerian hospitals have been closed down if even a single case
appears. Better established is Lyme disease, caused by a spirochete that we
get from the bite of ticks carried by mice and deer. Although the first
known human cases in the United States appeared only as recently as
1962, Lyme disease is already reaching epidemic proportions in many
parts of our country. The future of AIDS, derived from monkey viruses
and first documented in humans around 1959, is even more secure (from
the virus's perspective).