1 98 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
microbes? Let's stamp out the scoundrels, and never mind what their
motives are! In life in general, though, one has to understand the enemy in
order to beat him, and that's especially true in medicine.
Hence let's begin by temporarily setting aside our human bias and con
sidering disease from the microbes' point of view. After all, microbes are
as much a product of natural selection as we are. What evolutionary bene
fit does a microbe derive from making us sick in bizarre ways, like giving
us genital sores or diarrhea? And why should microbes evolve so as to kill
us? That seems especially puzzling and self-defeating, since a microbe that
kills its host kills itself.
Basically, microbes evolve like other species. Evolution selects for those
individuals most effective at producing babies and at helping them spread
to suitable places to live. For a microbe, spread may be defined mathemati
cally as the number of new victims infected per each original patient. That
number depends on how long each victim remains capable of infecting
new victims, and how efficiently the microbe is transferred from one victim
to the next.
Microbes have evolved diverse ways of spreading from one person to
another, and from animals to people. The germ that spreads better leaves
more babies and ends up favored by natural selection. Many of our
"symptoms" of disease actually represent ways in which some damned
clever microbe modifies our bodies or our behavior such that we become
enlisted to spread microbes.
The most effortless way a germ could spread is by just waiting to be
transmitted passively to the next victim. That's the strategy practiced by
microbes that wait for one host to be eaten by the next host: for instance,
salmonella bacteria, which we contract by eating already infected eggs or
meat; the worm responsible for trichinosis, which gets from pigs to us by
waiting for us to kill the pig and eat it without proper cooking; and the
worm causing anisakiasis, with which sushi-loving Japanese and Ameri
cans occasionally infect themselves by consuming raw fish. Those parasites
pass to a person from an eaten animal, but the virus causing laughing
sickness (kuru) in the New Guinea highlands used to pass to a person from
another person who was eaten. It was transmitted by cannibalism, when
highland babies made the fatal mistake of licking their fingers after playing
with raw brains that their mothers had just cut out of dead kuru victims
awaiting cooking.
Some microbes don't wait for the old host to die and get eaten, but