340 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
bones and mollusk shells, as well as of stone net sinkers and adzes suitable
for hollowing out a wooden canoe. Evidently, those first Neolithic occu
pants of Taiwan had watercraft adequate for deep-sea fishing and for regu
lar sea traffic across Taiwan Strait, separating that island from the China
coast. Thus, Taiwan Strait may have served as the training ground where
mainland Chinese developed the open-water maritime skills that would
permit them to expand over the Pacific.
One specific type of artifact linking Taiwan's Ta-p'en-k'eng culture to
later Pacific island cultures is a bark beater, a stone implement used for
pounding the fibrous bark of certain tree species into rope, nets, and cloth
ing. Once Pacific peoples spread beyond the range of wool-yielding domes
tic animals and fiber plant crops and hence of woven clothing, they became
dependent on pounded bark "cloth" for their clothing. Inhabitants of
Rennell Island, a traditional Polynesian island that did not become West
ernized until the 1930s, told me that Westernization yielded the wonderful
side benefit that the island became quiet. No more sounds of bark beaters
everywhere, pounding out bark cloth from dawn until after dusk every
day!
Within a millennium or so after the Ta-p'en-k'eng culture reached Tai
wan, archaeological evidence shows that cultures obviously derived from
it spread farther and farther from Taiwan to fill up the modern Austrone
sian realm (Figure 17.2). The evidence includes ground stone tools, pot
tery, bones of domestic pigs, and crop remains. For example, the decorated
Ta-p'en-k'eng pottery on Taiwan gave way to undecorated plain or red
pottery, which has also been found at sites in the Philippines and on the
Indonesian islands of Celebes and Timor. This cultural "package" of pot
tery, stone tools, and domesticates appeared around 3000 B.c. in the Phil
ippines, around 2500 B.c. on the Indonesian islands of Celebes and North
Borneo and Timor, around 2000 B.C. on Java and Sumatra, and around
1600 B.C. in the New Guinea region. There, as we shall see, the expansion
assumed a speedboat pace, as bearers of the cultural package raced east
ward into the previously uninhabited Pacific Ocean beyond the Solomon
Archipelago. The last phases of the expansion, during the millennium after
A.D. 1, resulted in the colonization of every Polynesian and Micronesian
island capable of supporting humans. Astonishingly, it also swept west
ward across the Indian Ocean to the east coast of Africa, resulting in the
colonization of the island of Madagascar.