262 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Africa) is the world's largest landmass, encompassing the largest number
of competing societies. It was also the landmass with the two centers where
food production began the earliest: the Fertile Crescent and China. Its
east-west major axis permitted many inventions adopted in one part of
Eurasia to spread relatively rapidly to societies at similar latitudes and
climates elsewhere in Eurasia. Its breadth along its minor axis (north-
south) contrasts with the Americas' narrowness at the Isthmus of Panama.
It lacks the severe ecological barriers transecting the major axes of the
Americas and Africa. Thus, geographic and ecological barriers to diffusion
of technology were less severe in Eurasia than in other continents. Thanks
to all these factors, Eurasia was the continent on which technology started
its post-Pleistocene acceleration earliest and resulted in the greatest local
accumulation of technologies.
North and South America are conventionally regarded as separate con
tinents, but they have been connected for several million years, pose simi
lar historical problems, and may be considered together for comparison
with Eurasia. The Americas form the world's second-largest landmass, sig
nificantly smaller than Eurasia. However, they are fragmented by geogra
phy and by ecology: the Isthmus of Panama, only 40 miles wide, virtually
transects the Americas geographically, as do the isthmus's Darien rain for
ests and the northern Mexican desert ecologically. The latter desert sepa
rated advanced human societies of Mesoamerica from those of North
America, while the isthmus separated advanced societies of Mesoamerica
from those of the Andes and Amazonia. In addition, the main axis of the
Americas is north-south, forcing most diffusion to go against a gradient
of latitude (and climate) rather than to operate within the same latitude.
For example, wheels were invented in Mesoamerica, and llamas were
domesticated in the central Andes by 3000 B.c., but 5,000 years later the
Americas' sole beast of burden and sole wheels had still not encountered
each other, even though the distance separating Mesoamerica's Maya soci
eties from the northern border of the Inca Empire (1,200 miles) was far
less than the 6,000 miles separating wheel- and horse-sharing France and
China. Those factors seem to me to account for the Americas' technologi
cal lag behind Eurasia.
Sub-Saharan Africa is the world's third largest landmass, considerably
smaller than the Americas. Throughout most of human history it was far
more accessible to Eurasia than were the Americas, but the Saharan desert
is still a major ecological barrier separating sub-Saharan Africa from