228 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
to the Etruscans in the same century, and in the next century to the
Romans, whose alphabet with slight modifications is the one used to print
this book. Thanks to their potential advantage of combining precision
with simplicity, alphabets have now been adopted in most areas of the
modern world.
WHILE BLUEPRINT COPYING and modification are the most straight
forward option for transmitting technology, that option is sometimes
unavailable. Blueprints may be kept secret, or they may be unreadable to
someone not already steeped in the technology. Word may trickle through
about an invention made somewhere far away, but the details may not get
transmitted. Perhaps only the basic idea is known: someone has succeeded,
somehow, in achieving a certain final result. That knowledge may never
theless inspire others, by idea diffusion, to devise their own routes to such
a result.
A striking example from the history of writing is the origin of the sylla
bary devised in Arkansas around 1820 by a Cherokee Indian named
Sequoyah, for writing the Cherokee language. Sequoyah observed that
white people made marks on paper, and that they derived great advantage
by using those marks to record and repeat lengthy speeches. However, the
detailed operations of those marks remained a mystery to him, since (like
most Cherokees before 1820) Sequoyah was illiterate and could neither
speak nor read English. Because he was a blacksmith, Sequoyah began by
devising an accounting system to help him keep track of his customers'
debts. He drew a picture of each customer; then he drew circles and lines
of various sizes to represent the amount of money owed.
Around 1810, Sequoyah decided to go on to design a system for writing
the Cherokee language. He again began by drawing pictures, but gave
them up as too complicated and too artistically demanding. He next
started to invent separate signs for each word, and again became dissatis
fied when he had coined thousands of signs and still needed more.
Finally, Sequoyah realized that words were made up of modest numbers
of different sound bites that recurred in many different words—what we
would call syllables. He initially devised 200 syllabic signs and gradually
reduced them to 85, most of them for combinations of one consonant and
one vowel.
As one source of the signs themselves, Sequoyah practiced copying the