FURTHER READINGS • 4 3 5
Five important sources, all of them excellent and fact-filled, address the
question how food production evolved from the hunter-gatherer lifestyle:
Kent Flannery, "The origins of agriculture," Annual Reviews of Anthro
pology 2:271-310 (1973); Jack Harlan, Crops and Man, 2nd ed. (Madi
son, Wis.: American Society of Agronomy, 1992); Richard MacNeish, The
Origins of Agriculture and Settled Life (Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press, 1992); David Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture: An Evolutionary
Perspective (San Diego: Academic Press, 1984); and Bruce Smith, The
Emergence of Agriculture (New York: Scientific American Library, 1995).
Notable older references about food production in general include two
multi-author volumes: Peter Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby, eds., The Domesti
cation and Exploitation of Plants and Animals (Chicago: Aldine, 1969),
and Charles Reed, ed., Origins of Agriculture (The Hague: Mouton,
1977). Carl Sauer, Agricultural Origins and Dispersals (New York: Ameri
can Geographical Society, 1952), is a classic early comparison of Old
World and New World food production, while Erich Isaac, Geography of
Domestication (Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970), addresses
the questions of where, when, and how regarding plant and animal domes
tication.
Among references specifically about plant domestication, Daniel
Zohary and Maria Hopf, Domestication of Plants in the Old World, 2nd
ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993), stands out. It provides the
most detailed account of plant domestication available for any part of the
world. For each significant crop grown in western Eurasia, the book sum
marizes archaeological and genetic evidence about its domestication and
subsequent spread.
Among important multi-author books on plant domestication are C.
Wesley Cowan and Patty Jo Watson, eds., The Origins of Agriculture
(Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992), David Harris
and Gordon Hillman, eds., Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant
Exploitation (London: Unwin Hyman, 1989), and C. Barigozzi, ed., The
Origin and Domestication of Cultivated Plants (Amsterdam: Elsevier,
1986). Two engaging popular accounts of plant domestication by Charles
Heiser, Jr., are Seed to Civilization: The Story of Food, 3rd ed. (Cam
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1990), and Of Plants and People (Nor
man: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985). J. Smartt and N. W.
Simmonds, ed., Evolution of Crop Plants, 2nd ed. (London: Longman,
1995), is the standard reference volume summarizing information about
all of the world's major crops and many minor ones. Three excellent