I I 6 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
others trick an animal into carrying their seeds, by wrapping the seed in a
tasty fruit and advertising the fruit's ripeness by its color or smell. The
hungry animal plucks and swallows the fruit, walks or flies off, and then
spits out or defecates the seed somewhere far from its parent tree. Seeds
can in this manner be carried for thousands of miles.
It may come as a surprise to learn that plant seeds can resist digestion by
your gut and nonetheless germinate out of your feces. But any adventurous
readers who are not too squeamish can make the test and prove it for
themselves. The seeds of many wild plant species actually must pass
through an animal's gut before they can germinate. For instance, one Afri
can melon species is so well adapted to being eaten by a hyena-like animal
called the aardwolf that most melons of that species grow on the latrine
sites of aardwolves.
As an example of how would-be plant hitchhikers attract animals, con
sider wild strawberries. When strawberry seeds are still young and not yet
ready to be planted, the surrounding fruit is green, sour, and hard. When
the seeds finally mature, the berries turn red, sweet, and tender. The
change in the berries' color serves as a signal attracting birds like thrushes
to pluck the berries and fly off, eventually to spit out or defecate the seeds.
Naturally, strawberry plants didn't set out with a conscious intent of
attracting birds when, and only when, their seeds were ready to be dis
persed. Neither did thrushes set out with the intent of domesticating straw
berries. Instead, strawberry plants evolved through natural selection. The
greener and more sour the young strawberry, the fewer the birds that
destroyed the seeds by eating berries before the seeds were ready; the
sweeter and redder the final strawberry, the more numerous the birds that
dispersed its ripe seeds.
Countless other plants have fruits adapted to being eaten and dispersed
by particular species of animals. Just as strawberries are adapted to birds,
so acorns are adapted to squirrels, mangos to bats, and some sedges to
ants. That fulfills part of our definition of plant domestication, as the
genetic modification of an ancestral plant in ways that make it more useful
to consumers. But no one would seriously describe this evolutionary pro
cess as domestication, because birds and bats and other animal consumers
don't fulfill the other part of the definition: they don't consciously grow
plants. In the same way, the early unconscious stages of crop evolution
from wild plants consisted of plants evolving in ways that attracted
humans to eat and disperse their fruit without yet intentionally growing