UP TO THE STARTING LINE • 5 I
the whole New World. If by head start you instead mean the time required
to adapt to local conditions, I grant that some extreme environments did
take time: for instance, 9,000 years to occupy the High Arctic after the
occupation of the rest of North America. But people would have explored
and adapted to most other areas quickly, once modern human inventive
ness had developed. For example, after the ancestors of the Maori reached
New Zealand, it apparently took them barely a century to discover all
worthwhile stone sources; only a few more centuries to kill every last moa
in some of the world's most rugged terrain; and only a few centuries to
differentiate into a range of diverse societies, from that of coastal hunter-
gatherers to that of farmers practicing new types of food storage.
Our archaeologist might therefore look at the Americas and conclude
that Africans, despite their apparently enormous head start, would have
been overtaken by the earliest Americans within at most a millennium.
Thereafter, the Americas' greater area (50 percent greater than Africa's)
and much greater environmental diversity would have given the advantage
to Native Americans over Africans.
The archaeologist might then turn to Eurasia and reason as follows.
Eurasia is the world's largest continent. It has been occupied for longer
than any other continent except Africa. Africa's long occupation before
the colonization of Eurasia a million years ago might have counted for
nothing anyway, because protohumans were at such a primitive stage then.
Our archaeologist might look at the Upper Paleolithic flowering of south
western Europe between 20,000 and 12,000 years ago, with all those
famous artworks and complex tools, and wonder whether Eurasia was
already getting a head start then, at least locally.
Finally, the archaeologist would turn to Australia / New Guinea, noting
first its small area (it's the smallest continent), the large fraction of it cov
ered by desert capable of supporting few humans, the continent's isolation,
and its later occupation than that of Africa and Eurasia. All that might
lead the archaeologist to predict slow development in Australia / New
Guinea.
But remember that Australians and New Guineans had by far the earli
est watercraft in the world. They were creating cave paintings apparently
at least as early as the Cro-Magnons in Europe. Jonathan Kingdon and
Tim Flannery have noted that the colonization of Australia / New Guinea
from the islands of the Asian continental shelf required humans to learn to
deal with the new environments they encountered on the islands of central