2 44 GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Inventors often have to persist at their tinkering for a long time in the
absence of public demand, because early models perform too poorly to be
useful. The first cameras, typewriters, and television sets were as awful as
Otto's seven-foot-tall gas engine. That makes it difficult for an inventor to
foresee whether his or her awful prototype might eventually find a use and
thus warrant more time and expense to develop it. Each year, the United
States issues about 70,000 patents, only a few of which ultimately reach
the stage of commercial production. For each great invention that ulti
mately found a use, there are countless others that did not. Even inventions
that meet the need for which they were initially designed may later prove
more valuable at meeting unforeseen needs. While James Watt designed
his steam engine to pump water from mines, it soon was supplying power
to cotton mills, then (with much greater profit) propelling locomotives and
boats.
THUS, THE COMMONSENSE view of invention that served as our start
ing point reverses the usual roles of invention and need. It also overstates
the importance of rare geniuses, such as Watt and Edison. That "heroic
theory of invention," as it is termed, is encouraged by patent law, because
an applicant for a patent must prove the novelty of the invention submit
ted. Inventors thereby have a financial incentive to denigrate or ignore
previous work. From a patent lawyer's perspective, the ideal invention is
one that arises without any precursors, like Athene springing fully formed
from the forehead of Zeus.
In reality, even for the most famous and apparently decisive modern
inventions, neglected precursors lurked behind the bald claim "X invented
Y." For instance, we are regularly told, "James Watt invented the steam
engine in 1769," supposedly inspired by watching steam rise from a tea
kettle's spout. Unfortunately for this splendid fiction, Watt actually got the
idea for his particular steam engine while repairing a model of Thomas
Newcomen's steam engine, which Newcomen had invented 57 years ear
lier and of which over a hundred had been manufactured in England by
the time of Watt's repair work. Newcomen's engine, in turn, followed the
steam engine that the Englishman Thomas Savery patented in 1698, which
followed the steam engine that the Frenchman Denis Papin designed (but
did not build) around 1680, which in turn had precursors in the ideas of