3 84 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
The fragmented distribution of Nilo-Saharan languages in Figure 19.2
similarly implies that many speakers of those languages have been
engulfed by speakers of Afroasiatic or Niger-Congo languages. But the
distribution of Khoisan languages testifies to an even more dramatic
engulfing. Those languages are famously unique in the whole world in
their use of clicks as consonants. (If you've been puzzled by the name
!Kung Bushman, the exclamation mark is not an expression of premature
astonishment; it's just how linguists denote a click.) All existing Khoisan
languages are confined to southern Africa, with two exceptions. Those
exceptions are two very distinctive, click-laden Khoisan languages named
Hadza and Sandawe, stranded in Tanzania more than 1,000 miles from
the nearest Khoisan languages of southern Africa.
In addition, Xhosa and a few other Niger-Congo languages of southern
Africa are full of clicks. Even more unexpectedly, clicks or Khoisan words
also appear in two Afroasiatic languages spoken by blacks in Kenya,
stranded still farther from present Khoisan peoples than are the Hadza
and Sandawe peoples of Tanzania. All this suggests that Khoisan languages
and peoples formerly extended far north of their present southern African
distribution, until they too, like the Pygmies, were engulfed by the blacks,
leaving only linguistic legacies of their former presence. That's a unique
contribution of the linguistic evidence, something we could hardly have
guessed just from physical studies of living people.
I have saved the most remarkable contribution of linguistics for last. If
you look again at Figure 19.2, you'll see that the Niger-Congo language
family is distributed all over West Africa and most of subequatorial Africa,
apparently giving no clue as to where within that enormous range the fam
ily originated. However, Greenberg recognized that all Niger-Congo lan
guages of subequatorial Africa belong to a single language subgroup
termed Bantu. That subgroup accounts for nearly half of the 1,032 Niger-
Congo languages and for more than half (nearly 200 million) of the Niger-
Congo speakers. But all those 500 Bantu languages are so similar to each
other that they have been facetiously described as 500 dialects of a single
language.
Collectively, the Bantu languages constitute only a single, low-order
subfamily of the Niger-Congo language family. Most of the 176 other sub
families are crammed into West Africa, a small fraction of the entire Niger-
Congo range. In particular, the most distinctive Bantu languages, and the
non-Bantu Niger-Congo languages most closely related to Bantu Ian-