202 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
ing evolutionary contest, with the death of one contestant the price of
defeat, and with natural selection playing the role of umpire. Now let's
consider the form of the contest: blitzkrieg or guerrilla war?
SUPPOSE THAT ONE counts the number of cases of some particular
infectious disease in some geographic area, and watches how the numbers
change with time. The resulting patterns differ greatly among diseases. For
certain diseases, like malaria or hookworm, new cases appear any month
of any year in an affected area. So-called epidemic diseases, though, pro
duce no cases for a long time, then a whole wave of cases, then no more
cases again for a while.
Among such epidemic diseases, influenza is one personally familiar to
most Americans, certain years being particularly bad years for us (but
great years for the influenza virus). Cholera epidemics come at longer
intervals, the 1991 Peruvian epidemic being the first one to reach the New
World during the 20th century. Although today's influenza and cholera
epidemics make front-page stories, epidemics used to be far more terrify
ing before the rise of modern medicine. The greatest single epidemic in
human history was the one of influenza that killed 21 million people at the
end of the First World War. The Black Death (bubonic plague) killed one-
quarter of Europe's population between 1346 and 1352, with death tolls
ranging up to 70 percent in some cities. When the Canadian Pacific Rail
road was being built through Saskatchewan in the early 1880s, that prov
ince's Native Americans, who had previously had little exposure to whites
and their germs, died of tuberculosis at the incredible rate of 9 percent per
year.
The infectious diseases that visit us as epidemics, rather than as a steady
trickle of cases, share several characteristics. First, they spread quickly and
efficiently from an infected person to nearby healthy people, with the
result that the whole population gets exposed within a short time. Second,
they're "acute" illnesses: within a short time, you either die or recover
completely. Third, the fortunate ones of us who do recover develop anti
bodies that leave us immune against a recurrence of the disease for a long
time, possibly for the rest of our life. Finally, these diseases tend to be
restricted to humans; the microbes causing them tend not to live in the soil
or in other animals. All four of these traits apply to what Americans think