72 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
"Atahuallpa asked for the Book, that he might look at it, and the Friar
gave it to him closed. Atahuallpa did not know how to open the Book,
and the Friar was extending his arm to do so, when Atahuallpa, in great
anger, gave him a blow on the arm, not wishing that it should be opened.
Then he opened it himself, and, without any astonishment at the letters
and paper he threw it away from him five or six paces, his face a deep
crimson.
"The Friar returned to Pizarro, shouting, 'Come out! Come out, Chris
tians! Come at these enemy dogs who reject the things of God. That tyrant
has thrown my book of holy law to the ground! Did you not see what
happened? Why remain polite and servile toward this over-proud dog
when the plains are full of Indians? March out against him, for I absolve
you!'
"The governor then gave the signal to Candia, who began to fire off the
guns. At the same time the trumpets were sounded, and the armored Span
ish troops, both cavalry and infantry, sallied forth out of their hiding
places straight into the mass of unarmed Indians crowding the square,
giving the Spanish battle cry, 'Santiago!' We had placed rattles on the
horses to terrify the Indians. The booming of the guns, the blowing of the
trumpets, and the rattles on the horses threw the Indians into panicked
confusion. The Spaniards fell upon them and began to cut them to pieces.
The Indians were so filled with fear that they climbed on top of one
another, formed mounds, and suffocated each other. Since they were
unarmed, they were attacked without danger to any Christian. The cavalry
rode them down, killing and wounding, and following in pursuit. The
infantry made so good an assault on those that remained that in a short
time most of them were put to the sword.
"The Governor himself took his sword and dagger, entered the thick of
the Indians with the Spaniards who were with him, and with great bravery
reached Atahuallpa's litter. He fearlessly grabbed Atahuallpa's left arm
and shouted 'Santiago!,' but he could not pull Atahuallpa out of his litter
because it was held up high. Although we killed the Indians who held the
litter, others at once took their places and held it aloft, and in this manner
we spent a long time in overcoming and killing Indians. Finally seven or
eight Spaniards on horseback spurred on their horses, rushed upon the
litter from one side, and with great effort they heaved it over on its side.
In that way Atahuallpa was captured, and the Governor took Atahuallpa