A NATURAL EXPERIMENT OF HISTORY • 57
Thus, Moriori and Maori societies developed from the same ancestral
society, but along very different lines. The resulting two societies lost
awareness even of each other's existence and did not come into contact
again for many centuries, perhaps for as long as 500 years. Finally, an
Australian seal-hunting ship visiting the Chathams en route to New
Zealand brought the news to New Zealand of islands where "there is an
abundance of sea and shellfish; the lakes swarm with eels; and it is a land
of the karaka berry.. . . The inhabitants are very numerous, but they do
not understand how to fight, and have no weapons." That news was
enough to induce 900 Maori to sail to the Chathams. The outcome clearly
illustrates how environments can affect economy, technology, political
organization, and fighting skills within a short time.
As I ALREADY mentioned, the Maori-Moriori collision represents a
small test within a medium-sized test. What can we learn from all of Poly
nesia about environmental influences on human societies? What differ
ences among societies on different Polynesian islands need to be
explained?
Polynesia as a whole presented a much wider range of environmental
conditions than did just New Zealand and the Chathams, although the
latter define one extreme (the simple end) of Polynesian organization. In
their subsistence modes, Polynesians ranged from the hunter-gatherers of
the Chathams, through slash-and-burn farmers, to practitioners of inten
sive food production living at some of the highest population densities
of any human societies. Polynesian food producers variously intensified
production of pigs, dogs, and chickens. They organized work forces to
construct large irrigation systems for agriculture and to enclose large
ponds for fish production. The economic basis of Polynesian societies con
sisted of more or less self-sufficient households, but some islands also sup
ported guilds of hereditary part-time craft specialists. In social
organization, Polynesian societies ran the gamut from fairly egalitarian
village societies to some of the most stratified societies in the world, with
many hierarchically ranked lineages and with chief and commoner classes
whose members married within their own class. In political organization,
Polynesian islands ranged from landscapes divided into independent tribal
or village units, up to multi-island proto-empires that devoted standing
military establishments to invasions of other islands and wars of conquest.