3 86 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
the process involved conquest, expulsion, interbreeding, killing, or epi
demics.) We've now seen, from Niger-Congo language distributions, that
the blacks who did the engulfing were the Bantu. The physical and linguis
tic evidence considered so far has let us infer these prehistoric engulfings,
but it still hasn't solved their mysteries for us. Only the further evidence
that I'll now present can help us answer two more questions: What advan
tages enabled the Bantu to displace the Pygmies and Khoisan? When did
the Bantu reach the former Pygmy and Khoisan homelands?
To APPROACH THE question about the Bantu's advantages, let's exam
ine the remaining type of evidence from the living present—the evidence
derived from domesticated plants and animals. As we saw in previous
chapters, that evidence is important because food production led to high
population densities, germs, technology, political organization, and other
ingredients of power. Peoples who, by accident of their geographic loca
tion, inherited or developed food production thereby became able to
engulf geographically less endowed people.
When Europeans reached sub-Saharan Africa in the 1400s, Africans
were growing five sets of crops (Figure 19.3), each of them laden with
significance for African history. The first set was grown only in North
Africa, extending to the highlands of Ethiopia. North Africa enjoys a Med
iterranean climate, characterized by rainfall concentrated in the winter
months. (Southern California also experiences a Mediterranean climate,
explaining why my basement and that of millions of other southern Cali¬
fornians often gets flooded in the winter but infallibly dries out in the
summer.) The Fertile Crescent, where agriculture arose, enjoys that same
Mediterranean pattern of winter rains.
Hence North Africa's original crops all prove to be ones adapted to
germinating and growing with winter rains, and known from archaeologi
cal evidence to have been first domesticated in the Fertile Crescent begin
ning around 10,000 years ago. Those Fertile Crescent crops spread into
climatically similar adjacent areas of North Africa and laid the founda
tions for the rise of ancient Egyptian civilization. They include such famil
iar crops as wheat, barley, peas, beans, and grapes. These are familiar to
us precisely because they also spread into climatically similar adjacent
areas of Europe, thence to America and Australia, and became some of the
staple crops of temperate-zone agriculture around the world.