HOW TO MAKE AN ALMOND • 1 23
crops as a result of selection by farmers, consciously or unconsciously.
That is, farmers initially selected seeds of certain wild plant individuals to
bring into their gardens and then chose certain progeny seeds each year to
grow in the next year's garden. But much of the transformation was also
effected as a result of plants' selecting themselves. Darwin's phrase "natu
ral selection" refers to certain individuals of a species surviving better,
and / or reproducing more successfully, than competing individuals of the
same species under natural conditions. In effect, the natural processes of
differential survival and reproduction do the selecting. If the conditions
change, different types of individuals may now survive or reproduce better
and become "naturally selected," with the result that the population
undergoes evolutionary change. A classic example is the development of
industrial melanism in British moths: darker moth individuals became rela
tively commoner than paler individuals as the environment became dirtier
during the 19th century, because dark moths resting on a dark, dirty tree
were more likely than contrasting pale moths to escape the attention of
predators.
Much as the Industrial Revolution changed the environment for moths,
farming changed the environment for plants. A tilled, fertilized, watered,
weeded garden provides growing conditions very different from those on
a dry, unfertilized hillside. Many changes of plants under domestication
resulted from such changes in conditions and hence in the favored types
of individuals. For example, when a farmer sows seeds densely in a garden,
there is intense competition among the seeds. Big seeds that can take
advantage of the good conditions to grow quickly will now be favored
over small seeds that were previously favored on dry, unfertilized hillsides
where seeds were sparser and competition less intense. Such increased
competition among plants themselves made a major contribution to larger
seed size and to many other changes developing during the transformation
of wild plants into ancient crops.
WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR the great differences among plants in ease of
domestication, such that some species were domesticated long ago and
others not until the Middle Ages, whereas still other wild plants have
proved immune to all our activities? We can deduce many of the answers
by examining the well-established sequence in which various crops devel
oped in Southwest Asia's Fertile Crescent.
It turns out that the earliest Fertile Crescent crops, such as the wheat