A NATURAL EXPERIMENT OF HISTORY • 63
Polynesian standards. The trends reached their zenith on the Hawaiian
Archipelago, consisting of the largest tropical Polynesian islands, where
high population densities and large land areas meant that very large labor
forces were potentially available to individual chiefs.
The variations among Polynesian societies associated with different
population densities and sizes were as follows. Economies remained sim
plest on islands with low population densities (such as the hunter-gather
ers of the Chathams), low population numbers (small atolls), or both low
densities and low numbers. In those societies each household made what
it needed; there was little or no economic specialization. Specialization
increased on larger, more densely populated islands, reaching a peak on
Samoa, the Societies, and especially Tonga and Hawaii. The latter two
islands supported hereditary part-time craft specialists, including canoe
builders, navigators, stone masons, bird catchers, and tattooers.
Social complexity was similarly varied. Again, the Chathams and the
atolls had the simplest, most egalitarian societies. While those islands
retained the original Polynesian tradition of having chiefs, their chiefs
wore little or no visible signs of distinction, lived in ordinary huts like
those of commoners, and grew or caught their food like everyone else.
Social distinctions and chiefly powers increased on high-density islands
with large political units, being especially marked on Tonga and the Socie
ties.
Social complexity again reached its peak in the Hawaiian Archipelago,
where people of chiefly descent were divided into eight hierarchically
ranked lineages. Members of those chiefly lineages did not intermarry with
commoners but only with each other, sometimes even with siblings or half-
siblings. Commoners had to prostrate themselves before high-ranking
chiefs. All the members of chiefly lineages, bureaucrats, and some craft
specialists were freed from the work of food production.
Political organization followed the same trends. On the Chathams and
atolls, the chiefs had few resources to command, decisions were reached
by general discussion, and landownership rested with the community as a
whole rather than with the chiefs. Larger, more densely populated political
units concentrated more authority with the chiefs. Political complexity
was greatest on Tonga and Hawaii, where the powers of hereditary chiefs
approximated those of kings elsewhere in the world, and where land was
controlled by the chiefs, not by the commoners. Using appointed bureau
crats as agents, chiefs requisitioned food from the commoners and also