APPLES OR INDIANS • 141
matter for the first farmers to take the seeds of wild cereals growing on
hillsides and dependent on unpredictable rains, and to plant those seeds
in the damp valley bottoms, where they would grow reliably and be less
dependent on rain.
The Fertile Crescent's biological diversity over small distances contrib
uted to a fourth advantage—its wealth in ancestors not only of valuable
crops but also of domesticated big mammals. As we shall see, there were
few or no wild mammal species suitable for domestication in the other
Mediterranean zones of California, Chile, southwestern Australia, and
South Africa. In contrast, four species of big mammals—the goat, sheep,
pig, and cow—were domesticated very early in the Fertile Crescent, possi
bly earlier than any other animal except the dog anywhere else in the
world. Those species remain today four of the world's five most important
domesticated mammals (Chapter 9). But their wild ancestors were com
monest in slightly different parts of the Fertile Crescent, with the result
that the four species were domesticated in different places: sheep possibly
in the central part, goats either in the eastern part at higher elevations (the
Zagros Mountains of Iran) or in the southwestern part (the Levant), pigs
in the north-central part, and cows in the western part, including Anatolia.
Nevertheless, even though the areas of abundance of these four wild pro
genitors thus differed, all four lived in sufficiently close proximity that they
were readily transferred after domestication from one part of the Fertile
Crescent to another, and the whole region ended up with all four species.
Agriculture was launched in the Fertile Crescent by the early domestica
tion of eight crops, termed "founder crops" (because they founded agricul
ture in the region and possibly in the world). Those eight founders were
the cereals emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, and barley; the pulses lentil, pea,
chickpea, and bitter vetch; and the fiber crop flax. Of these eight, only
two, flax and barley, range in the wild at all widely outside the Fertile
Crescent and Anatolia. Two of the founders had very small ranges in the
wild, chickpea being confined to southeastern Turkey and emmer wheat
to the Fertile Crescent itself. Thus, agriculture could arise in the Fertile
Crescent from domestication of locally available wild plants, without hav
ing to wait for the arrival of crops derived from wild plants domesticated
elsewhere. Conversely, two of the eight founder crops could not have been
domesticated anywhere in the world except in the Fertile Crescent, since
they did not occur wild elsewhere.
Thanks to this availability of suitable wild mammals and plants, early
peoples of the Fertile Crescent could quickly assemble a potent and bal-