40 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
bulls and horses in the Lascaux Cave of southwestern France will under
stand at once that their creators must have been as modern in their minds
as they were in their skeletons.
Obviously, some momentous change took place in our ancestors' capa
bilities between about 100,000 and 50,000 years ago. That Great Leap
Forward poses two major unresolved questions, regarding its triggering
cause and its geographic location. As for its cause, I argued in my book
The Third Chimpanzee for the perfection of the voice box and hence for
the anatomical basis of modern language, on which the exercise of human
creativity is so dependent. Others have suggested instead that a change in
brain organization around that time, without a change in brain size, made
modern language possible.
As for the site of the Great Leap Forward, did it take place primarily in
one geographic area, in one group of humans, who were thereby enabled
to expand and replace the former human populations of other parts of the
world? Or did it occur in parallel in different regions, in each of which
the human populations living there today would be descendants of the
populations living there before the leap? The rather modern-looking
human skulls from Africa around 100,000 years ago have been taken to
support the former view, with the leap occurring specifically in Africa.
Molecular studies (of so-called mitochondrial DNA) were initially also
interpreted in terms of an African origin of modern humans, though the
meaning of those molecular findings is currently in doubt. On the other
hand, skulls of humans living in China and Indonesia hundreds of thou
sands of years ago are considered by some physical anthropologists to
exhibit features still found in modern Chinese and in Aboriginal Austra
lians, respectively. If true, that finding would suggest parallel evolution
and multiregional origins of modern humans, rather than origins in a sin
gle Garden of Eden. The issue remains unresolved.
The evidence for a localized origin of modern humans, followed by their
spread and then their replacement of other types of humans elsewhere,
seems strongest for Europe. Some 40,000 years ago, into Europe came the
Cro-Magnons, with their modern skeletons, superior weapons, and other
advanced cultural traits. Within a few thousand years there were no more
Neanderthals, who had been evolving as the sole occupants of Europe for
hundreds of thousands of years. That sequence strongly suggests that the
modern Cro-Magnons somehow used their far superior technology, and
their language skills or brains, to infect, kill, or displace the Neanderthals,