SPACIOUS SKIES AND TILTED AXES • 185
can't stand cold northern winters with their short days and characteristic
germs, while others of us can't stand hot tropical climates with their own
characteristic diseases. In recent centuries overseas colonists from cool
northern Europe have preferred to emigrate to the similarly cool climates
of North America, Australia, and South Africa, and to settle in the cool
highlands within equatorial Kenya and New Guinea. Northern Europeans
who were sent out to hot tropical lowland areas used to die in droves of
diseases such as malaria, to which tropical peoples had evolved some
genetic resistance.
That's part of the reason why Fertile Crescent domesticates spread west
and east so rapidly: they were already well adapted to the climates of the
regions to which they were spreading. For instance, once farming crossed
from the plains of Hungary into central Europe around 5400 B.c., it
spread so quickly that the sites of the first farmers in the vast area from
Poland west to Holland (marked by their characteristic pottery with linear
decorations) were nearly contemporaneous. By the time of Christ, cereals
of Fertile Crescent origin were growing over the 8,000-mile expanse from
the Atlantic coast of Ireland to the Pacific coast of Japan. That west-east
expanse of Eurasia is the largest land distance on Earth.
Thus, Eurasia's west-east axis allowed Fertile Crescent crops quickly to
launch agriculture over the band of temperate latitudes from Ireland to the
Indus Valley, and to enrich the agriculture that arose independently in east
ern Asia. Conversely, Eurasian crops that were first domesticated far from
the Fertile Crescent but at the same latitudes were able to diffuse back to
the Fertile Crescent. Today, when seeds are transported over the whole
globe by ship and plane, we take it for granted that our meals are a geo
graphic mishmash. A typical American fast-food restaurant meal would
include chicken (first domesticated in China) and potatoes (from the
Andes) or corn (from Mexico), seasoned with black pepper (from India)
and washed down with a cup of coffee (of Ethiopian origin). Already,
though, by 2,000 years ago, Romans were also nourishing themselves with
their own hodgepodge of foods that mostly originated elsewhere. Of
Roman crops, only oats and poppies were native to Italy. Roman staples
were the Fertile Crescent founder package, supplemented by quince (origi
nating in the Caucasus); millet and cumin (domesticated in Central Asia);
cucumber, sesame, and citrus fruit (from India); and chicken, rice, apri
cots, peaches, and foxtail millet (originally from China). Even though
Rome's apples were at least native to western Eurasia, they were grown