FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 2 7 3
extreme and into chiefdoms at the opposite extreme. In particular, a tribal
big-man's role in dividing the meat of pigs slaughtered for feasts points to
the role of chiefs in collecting and redistributing food and goods—now
reconstrued as tribute—in chiefdoms. Similarly, presence or absence of
public architecture is supposedly one of the distinctions between tribes and
chiefdoms, but large New Guinea villages often have cult houses (known
as haus tamburan, on the Sepik River) that presage the temples of chief
doms.
ALTHOUGH A FEW bands and tribes survive today on remote and eco
logically marginal lands outside state control, fully independent chiefdoms
had disappeared by the early twentieth century, because they tended to
occupy prime land coveted by states. However, as of A.D. 1492, chiefdoms
were still widespread over much of the eastern United States, in productive
areas of South and Central America and sub-Saharan Africa that had not
yet been subsumed under native states, and in all of Polynesia. The archae
ological evidence discussed below suggests that chiefdoms arose by around
5500 B.C. in the Fertile Crescent and by around 1000 B.C. in Mesoamerica
and the Andes. Let us consider the distinctive features of chiefdoms, very
different from modern European and American states and, at the same
time, from bands and simple tribal societies.
As regards population size, chiefdoms were considerably larger than
tribes, ranging from several thousand to several tens of thousands of peo
ple. That size created serious potential for internal conflict because, for
any person living in a chiefdom, the vast majority of other people in the
chiefdom were neither closely related by blood or marriage nor known by
name. With the rise of chiefdoms around 7,500 years ago, people had to
learn, for the first time in history, how to encounter strangers regularly
without attempting to kill them.
Part of the solution to that problem was for one person, the chief, to
exercise a monopoly on the right to use force. In contrast to a tribe's big-
man, a chief held a recognized office, filled by hereditary right. Instead of
the decentralized anarchy of a village meeting, the chief was a permanent
centralized authority, made all significant decisions, and had a monopoly
on critical information (such as what a neighboring chief was privately
threatening, or what harvest the gods had supposedly promised). Unlike
big-men, chiefs could be recognized from afar by visible distinguishing