266 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
denly found themselves face-to-face with their victim's relatives. For exam
ple, one Fayu man spotted the man who had killed his father. The son
raised his ax and rushed at the murderer but was wrestled to the ground
by friends; then the murderer came at the prostrate son with an ax and
was also wrestled down. Both men were held, screaming in rage, until
they seemed sufficiently exhausted to be released. Other men periodically
shouted insults at each other, shook with anger and frustration, and
pounded the ground with their axes. That tension continued for the several
days of the gathering, while Doug prayed that the visit would not end in
violence.
The Fayu consist of about 400 hunter-gatherers, divided into four clans
and wandering over a few hundred square miles. According to their own
account, they had formerly numbered about 2,000, but their population
had been greatly reduced as a result of Fayu killing Fayu. They lacked
political and social mechanisms, which we take for granted, to achieve
peaceful resolution of serious disputes. Eventually, as a result of Doug's
visit, one group of Fayu invited a courageous husband-and-wife mission
ary couple to live with them. The couple has now resided there for a dozen
years and gradually persuaded the Fayu to renounce violence. The Fayu
are thereby being brought into the modern world, where they face an
uncertain future.
Many other previously uncontacted groups of New Guineans and Ama
zonian Indians have similarly owed to missionaries their incorporation
into modern society. After the missionaries come teachers and doctors,
bureaucrats and soldiers. The spreads of government and of religion have
thus been linked to each other throughout recorded history, whether the
spread has been peaceful (as eventually with the Fayu) or by force. In the
latter case it is often government that organizes the conquest, and religion
that justifies it. While nomads and tribespeople occasionally defeat orga
nized governments and religions, the trend over the past 13,000 years has
been for the nomads and tribespeople to lose.
At the end of the last Ice Age, much of the world's population lived in
societies similar to that of the Fayu today, and no people then lived in a
much more complex society. As recently as A.D. 1500, less than 20 percent
of the world's land area was marked off by boundaries into states run by
bureaucrats and governed by laws. Today, all land except Antarctica's is
so divided. Descendants of those societies that achieved centralized gov
ernment and organized religion earliest ended up dominating the modern