1 96 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
called into a hospital room to deal with a married couple stressed-out by a
mysterious illness. It did not help that the couple was also having difficulty
communicating with each other, and with my friend. The husband was a
small, timid man, sick with pneumonia caused by an unidentified microbe,
and with only limited command of the English language. Acting as transla
tor was his beautiful wife, worried about her husband's condition and
frightened by the unfamiliar hospital environment. My friend was also
stressed-out from a long week of hospital work, and from trying to figure
out what unusual risk factors might have brought on the strange illness.
The stress caused my friend to forget everything he had been taught about
patient confidentiality: he committed the awful blunder of requesting the
woman to ask her husband whether he'd had any sexual experiences that
could have caused the infection.
As the doctor watched, the husband turned red, pulled himself together
so that he seemed even smaller, tried to disappear under his bedsheets, and
stammered out words in a barely audible voice. His wife suddenly
screamed in rage and drew herself up to tower over him. Before the doctor
could stop her, she grabbed a heavy metal bottle, slammed it with full
force onto her husband's head, and stormed out of the room. It took a
while for the doctor to revive her husband and even longer to elicit,
through the man's broken English, what he'd said that so enraged his wife.
The answer slowly emerged: he had confessed to repeated intercourse with
sheep on a recent visit to the family farm; perhaps that was how he had
contracted the mysterious microbe.
This incident sounds bizarrely one-of-a-kind and of no possible broader
significance. In fact, it illustrates an enormous subject of great importance:
human diseases of animal origins. Very few of us love sheep in the carnal
sense that this patient did. But most of us platonically love our pet animals,
such as our dogs and cats. As a society, we certainly appear to have an
inordinate fondness for sheep and other livestock, to judge from the vast
numbers of them that we keep. For example, at the time of a recent census,
Australia's 17,085,400 people thought so highly of sheep that they kept
161,600,000 of them.
Some of us adults, and even more of our children, pick up infectious
diseases from our pets. Usually they remain no more than a nuisance, but
a few have evolved into something far more serious. The major killers
of humanity throughout our recent history—smallpox, flu, tuberculosis,
malaria, plague, measles, and cholera—are infectious diseases that evolved