3 80 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
hunter-gatherers without crops or livestock. Like blacks, Pygmies have
dark skins and tightly curled hair. However, Pygmies differ from blacks in
their much smaller size, more reddish and less black skins, more extensive
facial and body hair, and more prominent foreheads, eyes, and teeth. Pyg
mies are mostly hunter-gatherers living in groups widely scattered through
the Central African rain forest and trading with (or working for) neigh
boring black farmers.
The Khoisan make up the group least familiar to Americans, who are
unlikely even to have heard of their name. Formerly distributed over much
of southern Africa, they consisted not only of small-sized hunter-gatherers,
known as San, but also of larger herders, known as Khoi. (These names
are now preferred to the better-known terms Hottentot and Bushmen.)
Both the Khoi and the San look (or looked) quite unlike African blacks:
their skins are yellowish, their hair is very tightly coiled, and the women
tend to accumulate much fat in their buttocks (termed "steatopygia"). As
a distinct group, the Khoi have been greatly reduced in numbers: European
colonists shot, displaced, or infected many of them, and most of the survi
vors interbred with Europeans to produce the populations variously
known in South Africa as Coloreds or Basters. The San were similarly
shot, displaced, and infected, but a dwindling small number have pre
served their distinctness in Namibian desert areas unsuitable for agricul
ture, as depicted some years ago in the widely seen film The Gods Must Be
Crazy.
The northern distribution of Africa's whites is unsurprising, because
physically similar peoples live in adjacent areas of the Near East and
Europe. Throughout recorded history, people have been moving back and
forth between Europe, the Near East, and North Africa. I'll therefore say
little more about Africa's whites in this chapter, since their origins aren't
mysterious. Instead, the mystery involves blacks, Pygmies, and Khoisan,
whose distributions hint at past population upheavals. For instance, the
present fragmented distribution of the 200,000 Pygmies, scattered amid
120 million blacks, suggests that Pygmy hunters were formerly widespread
through the equatorial forests until displaced and isolated by the arrival
of black farmers. The Khoisan area of southern Africa is surprisingly small
for a people so distinct in anatomy and language. Could the Khoisan, too,
have been originally more widespread until their more northerly popula
tions were somehow eliminated?
I've saved the biggest anomaly for last. The large island of Madagascar