70 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
killed us. So we made a show of good spirits, and after carefully observing
the town and the tents, we descended into the valley and entered Caja¬
marca.
"We talked a lot among ourselves about what to do. All of us were full
of fear, because we were so few in number and we had penetrated so far
into a land where we could not hope to receive reinforcements. We all met
with the Governor to debate what we should undertake the next day. Few
of us slept that night, and we kept watch in the square of Cajamarca,
looking at the campfires of the Indian army. It was a frightening sight.
Most of the campfires were on a hillside and so close to each other that it
looked like the sky brightly studded with stars. There was no distinction
that night between the mighty and the lowly, or between foot soldiers and
horsemen. Everyone carried out sentry duty fully armed. So too did the
good old Governor, who went about encouraging his men. The Governor's
brother Hernando Pizarro estimated the number of Indian soldiers there
at 40,000, but he was telling a lie just to encourage us, for there were
actually more than 80,000 Indians.
"On the next morning a messenger from Atahuallpa arrived, and the
Governor said to him, 'Tell your lord to come when and how he pleases,
and that, in what way soever he may come I will receive him as a friend
and brother. I pray that he may come quickly, for I desire to see him. No
harm or insult will befall him.'
"The Governor concealed his troops around the square at Cajamarca,
dividing the cavalry into two portions of which he gave the command of
one to his brother Hernando Pizarro and the command of the other to
Hernando de Soto. In like manner he divided the infantry, he himself tak
ing one part and giving the other to his brother Juan Pizarro. At the same
time, he ordered Pedro de Candia with two or three infantrymen to go
with trumpets to a small fort in the plaza and to station themselves there
with a small piece of artillery. When all the Indians, and Atahuallpa with
them, had entered the Plaza, the Governor would give a signal to Candia
and his men, after which they should start firing the gun, and the trumpets
should sound, and at the sound of the trumpets the cavalry should dash
out of the large court where they were waiting hidden in readiness.
"At noon Atahuallpa began to draw up his men and to approach. Soon
we saw the entire plain full of Indians, halting periodically to wait for
more Indians who kept filing out of the camp behind them. They kept
filling out in separate detachments into the afternoon. The front detach-