272, GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
relatives, in an attempt to establish some relationship and hence some rea
son why the two should not attempt to kill each other.
Despite all of these differences between bands and tribes, many similari
ties remain. Tribes still have an informal, "egalitarian" system of govern
ment. Information and decision making are both communal. In the New
Guinea highlands, I have watched village meetings where all adults in the
village were present, sitting on the ground, and individuals made speeches,
without any appearance of one person's "chairing" the discussion. Many
highland villages do have someone known as the "big-man," the most
influential man of the village. But that position is not a formal office to be
filled and carries only limited power. The big-man has no independent
decision-making authority, knows no diplomatic secrets, and can do no
more than attempt to sway communal decisions. Big-men achieve that sta
tus by their own attributes; the position is not inherited.
Tribes also share with bands an "egalitarian" social system, without
ranked lineages or classes. Not only is status not inherited; no member of
a traditional tribe or band can become disproportionately wealthy by his
or her own efforts, because each individual has debts and obligations to
many others. It is therefore impossible for an outsider to guess, from
appearances, which of all the adult men in a village is the big-man: he lives
in the same type of hut, wears the same clothes or ornaments, or is as
naked, as everyone else.
Like bands, tribes lack a bureaucracy, police force, and taxes. Their
economy is based on reciprocal exchanges between individuals or families,
rather than on a redistribution of tribute paid to some central authority.
Economic specialization is slight: full-time crafts specialists are lacking,
and every able-bodied adult (including the big-man) participates in grow
ing, gathering, or hunting food. I recall one occasion when I was walking
past a garden in the Solomon Islands, saw a man digging and waving at
me in the distance, and realized to my astonishment that it was a friend of
mine named Faletau. He was the most famous wood carver of the Solo
mons, an artist of great originality—but that did not free him of the neces
sity to grow his own sweet potatoes. Since tribes thus lack economic
specialists, they also lack slaves, because there are no specialized menial
jobs for a slave to perform.
Just as musical composers of the classical period range from C. P. E.
Bach to Schubert and thereby cover the whole spectrum from baroque
composers to romantic composers, tribes also shade into bands at one