YALI'S QUESTION • 25
molded society, occupying lands conquered from Native Americans and
incorporating the descendants of millions of sub-Saharan black Africans
brought to America as slaves. Modern Europe is not a society molded by
sub-Saharan black Africans who brought millions of Native Americans as
slaves.
These results are completely lopsided: it was not the case that 51 per
cent of the Americas, Australia, and Africa was conquered by Europeans,
while 49 percent of Europe was conquered by Native Americans, Aborigi
nal Australians, or Africans. The whole modern world has been shaped by
lopsided outcomes. Hence they must have inexorable explanations, ones
more basic than mere details concerning who happened to win some battle
or develop some invention on one occasion a few thousand years ago.
It seems logical to suppose that history's pattern reflects innate differ
ences among people themselves. Of course, we're taught that it's not polite
to say so in public. We read of technical studies claiming to demonstrate
inborn differences, and we also read rebuttals claiming that those studies
suffer from technical flaws. We see in our daily lives that some of the con
quered peoples continue to form an underclass, centuries after the con
quests or slave imports took place. We're told that this too is to be
attributed not to any biological shortcomings but to social disadvantages
and limited opportunities.
Nevertheless, we have to wonder. We keep seeing all those glaring, per
sistent differences in peoples' status. We're assured that the seemingly
transparent biological explanation for the world's inequalities as of A.D.
1500 is wrong, but we're not told what the correct explanation is. Until
we have some convincing, detailed, agreed-upon explanation for the broad
pattern of history, most people will continue to suspect that the racist bio
logical explanation is correct after all. That seems to me the strongest argu
ment for writing this book.
AUTHORS ARE REGULARLY asked by journalists to summarize a long
book in one sentence. For this book, here is such a sentence: "History
followed different courses for different peoples because of differences
among peoples' environments, not because of biological differences among
peoples themselves."
Naturally, the notion that environmental geography and biogeography
influenced societal development is an old idea. Nowadays, though, the