SPACIOUS SKIES AND TILTED AXES • 187
Fertile Crescent livestock did. However, those tropical African crops could
never be transmitted across South Africa's Fish River, beyond which they
were stopped by Mediterranean conditions to which they were not
adapted.
The result was the all-too-familiar course of the last two millennia of
South African history. Some of South Africa's indigenous Khoisan peoples
(otherwise known as Hottentots and Bushmen) acquired livestock but
remained without agriculture. They became outnumbered and were
replaced northeast of the Fish River by black African farmers, whose
southward spread halted at that river. Only when European settlers
arrived by sea in 1652, bringing with them their Fertile Crescent crop
package, could agriculture thrive in South Africa's Mediterranean zone.
The collisions of all those peoples produced the tragedies of modern South
Africa: the quick decimation of the Khoisan by European germs and guns;
a century of wars between Europeans and blacks; another century of racial
oppression; and now, efforts by Europeans and blacks to seek a new mode
of coexistence in the former Khoisan lands.
CONTRAST ALSO THE ease of diffusion in Eurasia with its difficulties
along the Americas' north-south axis. The distance between Mesoamerica
and South America—say, between Mexico's highlands and Ecuador's—is
only 1,200 miles, approximately the same as the distance in Eurasia sepa
rating the Balkans from Mesopotamia. The Balkans provided ideal grow
ing conditions for most Mesopotamian crops and livestock, and received
those domesticates as a package within 2,000 years of its assembly in the
Fertile Crescent. That rapid spread preempted opportunities for domesti
cating those and related species in the Balkans. Highland Mexico and the
Andes would similarly have been suitable for many of each other's crops
and domestic animals. A few crops, notably Mexican corn, did indeed
spread to the other region in the pre-Columbian era.
But other crops and domestic animals failed to spread between Meso
america and South America. The cool highlands of Mexico would have
provided ideal conditions for raising llamas, guinea pigs, and potatoes, all
domesticated in the cool highlands of the South American Andes. Yet the
northward spread of those Andean specialties was stopped completely by
the hot intervening lowlands of Central America. Five thousand years after
llamas had been domesticated in the Andes, the Olmecs, Maya, Aztecs,