4 3 4 " FURTHER READINGS
and Paul Bahn and John Flenley, Easter Island, Earth Island (London:
Thames and Hudson, 1992).
Chapter 3
My account of Pizarro's capture of Atahuallpa combines the eyewitness
accounts by Francisco Pizarro's brothers Hernando Pizarro and Pedro
Pizarro and by Pizarro's companions Miguel de Estete, Cristobal de Mena,
Ruiz de Arce, and Francisco de Xerez. The accounts by Hernando Pizarro,
Miguel de Estete, and Francisco de Xerez have been translated by Clem
ents Markham, Reports on the Discovery of Peru, Hakluyt Society, 1st
ser., vol. 47 (New York, 1872); Pedro Pizarro's account, by Philip Means,
Relation of the Discovery and Conquest of the Kingdoms of Peru (New
York: Cortes Society, 1921); and Cristobal de Mena's account, by Joseph
Sinclair, The Conquest of Peru, as Recorded by a Member of the Pizarro
Expedition (New York, 1929). The account by Ruiz de Arce was reprinted
in Boletin de la Real Academia de Historia (Madrid) 102:327-84 (1933).
John Hemming's excellent The Conquest of the Incas (San Diego: Har-
court Brace Jovanovich, 1970) gives a full account of the capture and
indeed of the whole conquest, with an extensive bibliography. A 19th-
century account of the conquest, William H. Prescott's History of the Con
quest of Peru (New York, 1847), is still highly readable and ranks among
the classics of historical writing. Corresponding modern and classic 19th-
century accounts of the Spanish conquest of the Aztecs are, respectively,
Hugh Thomas, Conquest: Montezuma, Cortes, and the Fall of Old Mexico
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993), and William Prescott, History
of the Conquest of Mexico (New York, 1843). Contemporary eyewitness
accounts of the conquest of the Aztecs were written by Cortes himself
(reprinted as Hernando Cortes, Five Letters of Cortes to the Emperor
[New York: Norton, 1969]) and by many of Cortes's companions
(reprinted in Patricia de Fuentes, ed., The Conquistadors [Norman: Uni
versity of Oklahoma Press, 1993]).
Chapters 4-10
References for these seven chapters on food production will be com
bined, since many of the references apply to more than one of them.