I 8 • PROLOGUE
America in the modern world? Isn't that prominence just an ephemeral
phenomenon of the last few centuries, now fading behind the prominence
of Japan and Southeast Asia? In fact, most of this book will deal with
peoples other than Europeans. Rather than focus solely on interactions
between Europeans and non-Europeans, we shall also examine interac
tions between different non-European peoples—especially those that took
place within sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, Indonesia, and New
Guinea, among peoples native to those areas. Far from glorifying peoples
of western European origin, we shall see that most basic elements of their
civilization were developed by other peoples living elsewhere and were
then imported to western Europe.
Third, don't words such as "civilization," and phrases such as "rise of
civilization," convey the false impression that civilization is good, tribal
hunter-gatherers are miserable, and history for the past 13,000 years has
involved progress toward greater human happiness? In fact, I do not
assume that industrialized states are "better" than hunter-gatherer tribes,
or that the abandonment of the hunter-gatherer lifestyle for iron-based
statehood represents "progress," or that it has led to an increase in human
happiness. My own impression, from having divided my life between
United States cities and New Guinea villages, is that the so-called blessings
of civilization are mixed. For example, compared with hunter-gatherers,
citizens of modern industrialized states enjoy better medical care, lower
risk of death by homicide, and a longer life span, but receive much less
social support from friendships and extended families. My motive for
investigating these geographic differences in human societies is not to cele
brate one type of society over another but simply to understand what hap
pened in history.
DOES YALI'S QUESTION really need another book to answer it? Don't
we already know the answer? If so, what is it?
Probably the commonest explanation involves implicitly or explicitly
assuming biological differences among peoples. In the centuries after A.D.
1500, as European explorers became aware of the wide differences among
the world's peoples in technology and political organization, they assumed
that those differences arose from differences in innate ability. With the rise
of Darwinian theory, explanations were recast in terms of natural selection
and of evolutionary descent. Technologically primitive peoples were con-