370 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
on groupings of Native American languages reflect the difficulties that
complex Native American societies themselves faced in expanding within
the New World. Had any food-producing Native American peoples suc
ceeded in spreading far with their crops and livestock and rapidly replac
ing hunter-gatherers over a large area, they would have left legacies of
easily recognized language families, as in Eurasia, and the relationships of
Native American languages would not be so controversial.
Thus, we have identified three sets of ultimate factors that tipped the
advantage to European invaders of the Americas: Eurasia's long head start
on human settlement; its more effective food production, resulting from
greater availability of domesticable wild plants and especially of animals;
and its less formidable geographic and ecological barriers to intracontinen¬
tal diffusion. A fourth, more speculative ultimate factor is suggested by
some puzzling non-inventions in the Americas: the non-inventions of writ
ing and wheels in complex Andean societies, despite a time depth of those
societies approximately equal to that of complex Mesoamerican societies
that did make those inventions; and wheels' confinement to toys and their
eventual disappearance in Mesoamerica, where they could presumably
have been useful in human-powered wheelbarrows, as in China. These
puzzles remind one of equally puzzling non-inventions, or else disappear
ances of inventions, in small isolated societies, including Aboriginal Tas
mania, Aboriginal Australia, Japan, Polynesian islands, and the American
Arctic. Of course, the Americas in aggregate are anything but small: their
combined area is fully 76 percent that of Eurasia, and their human popula
tion as of A.D. 1492 was probably also a large fraction of Eurasia's. But
the Americas, as we have seen, are broken up into "islands" of societies
with tenuous connections to each other. Perhaps the histories of Native
American wheels and writing exemplify the principles illustrated in a more
extreme form by true island societies.
AFTER AT LEAST 13,000 years of separate developments, advanced
American and Eurasian societies finally collided within the last thousand
years. Until then, the sole contacts between human societies of the Old
and the New Worlds had involved the hunter-gatherers on opposite sides
of the Bering Strait.
There were no Native American attempts to colonize Eurasia, except at
the Bering Strait, where a small population of Inuit (Eskimos) derived from