106 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
shall see, food production evolved as a by-product of decisions made with
out awareness of their consequences. Hence the question that we have to
ask is why food production did evolve, why it evolved in some places but
not others, why at different times in different places, and why not instead
at some earlier or later date.
Another misconception is that there is necessarily a sharp divide
between nomadic hunter-gatherers and sedentary food producers. In real
ity, although we frequently draw such a contrast, hunter-gatherers in some
productive areas, including North America's Pacific Northwest coast and
possibly southeastern Australia, became sedentary but never became food
producers. Other hunter-gatherers, in Palestine, coastal Peru, and Japan,
became sedentary first and adopted food production much later. Sedentary
groups probably made up a much higher fraction of hunter-gatherers
15,000 years ago, when all inhabited parts of the world (including the
most productive areas) were still occupied by hunter-gatherers, than they
do today, when the few remaining hunter-gatherers survive only in unpro
ductive areas where nomadism is the sole option.
Conversely, there are mobile groups of food producers. Some modern
nomads of New Guinea's Lakes Plains make clearings in the jungle, plant
bananas and papayas, go off for a few months to live again as hunter-
gatherers, return to check on their crops, weed the garden if they find the
crops growing, set off again to hunt, return months later to check again,
and settle down for a while to harvest and eat if their garden has produced.
Apache Indians of the southwestern United States settled down to farm in
the summer at higher elevations and toward the north, then withdrew to
the south and to lower elevations to wander in search of wild foods during
the winter. Many herding peoples of Africa and Asia shift camp along
regular seasonal routes to take advantage of predictable seasonal changes
in pasturage. Thus, the shift from hunting-gathering to food production
did not always coincide with a shift from nomadism to sedentary living.
Another supposed dichotomy that becomes blurred in reality is a dis
tinction between food producers as active managers of their land and
hunter-gatherers as mere collectors of the land's wild produce. In reality,
some hunter-gatherers intensively manage their land. For example, New
Guinea peoples who never domesticated sago palms or mountain pan¬
danus nevertheless increase production of these wild edible plants by clear
ing away encroaching competing trees, keeping channels in sago swamps
clear, and promoting growth of new sago shoots by cutting down mature