APPLES OR INDIANS • 147
where. If it turned out that such crops did not become adopted for cultural
or other reasons, we would be left with a nagging doubt. Despite all our
reasoning so far, we would still have to suspect that the local wild flora
harbored some ancestor of a potential valuable crop that local farmers
failed to exploit because of similar cultural factors. These two examples
will also demonstrate in detail a fact critical to history: that indigenous
crops from different parts of the globe were not equally productive.
New Guinea, the largest island in the world after Greenland, lies just
north of Australia and near the equator. Because of its tropical location
and great diversity in topography and habitats, New Guinea is rich in both
plant and animal species, though less so than continental tropical areas
because it is an island. People have been living in New Guinea for at least
40,000 years—much longer than in the Americas, and slightly longer than
anatomically modern peoples have been living in western Europe. Thus,
New Guineans have had ample opportunity to get to know their local flora
and fauna. Were they motivated to apply this knowledge to developing
food production?
I mentioned already that the adoption of food production involved a
competition between the food producing and the hunting-gathering life
styles. Hunting-gathering is not so rewarding in New Guinea as to remove
the motivation to develop food production. In particular, modern New
Guinea hunters suffer from the crippling disadvantage of a dearth of wild
game: there is no native land animal larger than a 100-pound flightless
bird (the cassowary) and a 50-pound kangaroo. Lowland New Guineans
on the coast do obtain much fish and shellfish, and some lowlanders in the
interior still live today as hunter-gatherers, subsisting especially on wild
sago palms. But no peoples still live as hunter-gatherers in the New Guinea
highlands; all modern highlanders are instead farmers who use wild foods
only to supplement their diets. When highlanders go into the forest on
hunting trips, they take along garden-grown vegetables to feed themselves.
If they have the misfortune to run out of those provisions, even they starve
to death despite their detailed knowledge of locally available wild foods.
Since the hunting-gathering lifestyle is thus nonviable in much of modern
New Guinea, it comes as no surprise that all New Guinea highlanders and
most lowlanders today are settled farmers with sophisticated systems of
food production. Extensive, formerly forested areas of the highlands were
converted by traditional New Guinea farmers to fenced, drained, inten
sively managed field systems supporting dense human populations.