20 • PROLOGUE
An enormous effort by cognitive psychologists has gone into the search
for differences in IQ between peoples of different geographic origins now
living in the same country. In particular, numerous white American psy
chologists have been trying for decades to demonstrate that black Ameri
cans of African origins are innately less intelligent than white Americans
of European origins. However, as is well known, the peoples compared
differ greatly in their social environment and educational opportunities.
This fact creates double difficulties for efforts to test the hypothesis that
intellectual differences underlie technological differences. First, even our
cognitive abilities as adults are heavily influenced by the social environ
ment that we experienced during childhood, making it hard to discern any
influence of preexisting genetic differences. Second, tests of cognitive abil
ity (like IQ tests) tend to measure cultural learning and not pure innate
intelligence, whatever that is. Because of those undoubted effects of child
hood environment and learned knowledge on IQ test results, the psycholo
gists' efforts to date have not succeeded in convincingly establishing the
postulated genetic deficiency in IQs of nonwhite peoples.
My perspective on this controversy comes from 33 years of working
with New Guineans in their own intact societies. From the very beginning
of my work with New Guineans, they impressed me as being on the aver
age more intelligent, more alert, more expressive, and more interested in
things and people around them than the average European or American
is. At some tasks that one might reasonably suppose to reflect aspects of
brain function, such as the ability to form a mental map of unfamiliar
surroundings, they appear considerably more adept than Westerners. Of
course, New Guineans tend to perform poorly at tasks that Westerners
have been trained to perform since childhood and that New Guineans have
not. Hence when unschooled New Guineans from remote villages visit
towns, they look stupid to Westerners. Conversely, I am constantly aware
of how stupid I look to New Guineans when I'm with them in the jungle,
displaying my incompetence at simple tasks (such as following a jungle
trail or erecting a shelter) at which New Guineans have been trained since
childhood and I have not.
It's easy to recognize two reasons why my impression that New Guin
eans are smarter than Westerners may be correct. First, Europeans have for
thousands of years been living in densely populated societies with central
governments, police, and judiciaries. In those societies, infectious epidemic
diseases of dense populations (such as smallpox) were historically the