A NATURAL EXPERIMENT OF HISTORY • 55
really are significant. If you were a laboratory scientist studying rats, you
might perform such a test by taking one rat colony, distributing groups of
those ancestral rats among many cages with differing environments, and
coming back many rat generations later to see what had happened. Of
course, such purposeful experiments cannot be carried out on human soci
eties. Instead, scientists must look for "natural experiments," in which
something similar befell humans in the past.
Such an experiment unfolded during the settlement of Polynesia. Scat
tered over the Pacific Ocean beyond New Guinea and Melanesia are thou
sands of islands differing greatly in area, isolation, elevation, climate,
productivity, and geological and biological resources (Figure 2.1). For
most of human history those islands lay far beyond the reach of water
craft. Around 1200 B.C. a group of farming, fishing, seafaring people from
the Bismarck Archipelago north of New Guinea finally succeeded in reach
ing some of those islands. Over the following centuries their descendants
colonized virtually every habitable scrap of land in the Pacific. The process
was mostly complete by A.D. 500, with the last few islands settled around
or soon after A.D. 1000.
Thus, within a modest time span, enormously diverse island environ
ments were settled by colonists all of whom stemmed from the same
founding population. The ultimate ancestors of all modern Polynesian
populations shared essentially the same culture, language, technology, and
set of domesticated plants and animals. Hence Polynesian history consti
tutes a natural experiment allowing us to study human adaptation, devoid
of the usual complications of multiple waves of disparate colonists that
often frustrate our attempts to understand adaptation elsewhere in the
world.
Within that medium-sized test, the fate of the Moriori forms a smaller
test. It is easy to trace how the differing environments of the Chatham
Islands and of New Zealand molded the Moriori and the Maori differ
ently. While those ancestral Maori who first colonized the Chathams may
have been farmers, Maori tropical crops could not grow in the Chathams'
cold climate, and the colonists had no alternative except to revert to being
hunter-gatherers. Since as hunter-gatherers they did not produce crop sur
pluses available for redistribution or storage, they could not support and
feed nonhunting craft specialists, armies, bureaucrats, and chiefs. Their
prey were seals, shellfish, nesting seabirds, and fish that could be captured
by hand or with clubs and required no more elaborate technology. In addi-