4 12 • EPILOGUE
cast iron, the compass, gunpowder, paper, printing, and many others men
tioned earlier. It also led the world in political power, navigation, and
control of the seas. In the early 15th century it sent treasure fleets, each
consisting of hundreds of ships up to 400 feet long and with total crews
of up to 28,000, across the Indian Ocean as far as the east coast of Africa,
decades before Columbus's three puny ships crossed the narrow Atlantic
Ocean to the Americas' east coast. Why didn't Chinese ships proceed
around Africa's southern cape westward and colonize Europe, before
Vasco da Gama's own three puny ships rounded the Cape of Good Hope
eastward and launched Europe's colonization of East Asia? Why didn't
Chinese ships cross the Pacific to colonize the Americas' west coast? Why,
in brief, did China lose its technological lead to the formerly so backward
Europe?
The end of China's treasure fleets gives us a clue. Seven of those fleets
sailed from China between A.D. 1405 and 1433. They were then sus
pended as a result of a typical aberration of local politics that could hap
pen anywhere in the world: a power struggle between two factions at the
Chinese court (the eunuchs and their opponents). The former faction had
been identified with sending and captaining the fleets. Hence when the
latter faction gained the upper hand in a power struggle, it stopped sending
fleets, eventually dismantled the shipyards, and forbade oceangoing ship
ping. The episode is reminiscent of the legislation that strangled develop
ment of public electric lighting in London in the 1880s, the isolationism
of the United States between the First and Second World Wars, and any
number of backward steps in any number of countries, all motivated by
local political issues. But in China there was a difference, because the
entire region was politically unified. One decision stopped fleets over the
whole of China. That one temporary decision became irreversible, because
no shipyards remained to turn out ships that would prove the folly of that
temporary decision, and to serve as a focus for rebuilding other shipyards.
Now contrast those events in China with what happened when fleets of
exploration began to sail from politically fragmented Europe. Christopher
Columbus, an Italian by birth, switched his allegiance to the duke of Anjou
in France, then to the king of Portugal. When the latter refused his request
for ships in which to explore westward, Columbus turned to the duke of
Medina-Sedonia, who also refused, then to the count of Medina-Celi, who
did likewise, and finally to the king and queen of Spain, who denied
Columbus's first request but eventually granted his renewed appeal. Had