ZEBRAS AND UNHAPPY MARRIAGES • 1 59
ties.) If one defines "big" as "weighing over 100 pounds," then only 14
such species were domesticated before the twentieth century (see Table 9.1
for a list). Of those Ancient Fourteen, 9 (the "Minor Nine" of Table 9.1)
became important livestock for people in only limited areas of the globe:
the Arabian camel, Bactrian camel, llama/alpaca (distinct breeds of the
same ancestral species), donkey, reindeer, water buffalo, yak, banteng, and
gaur. Only 5 species became widespread and important around the world.
Those Major Five of mammal domestication are the cow, sheep, goat, pig,
and horse.
This list may at first seem to have glaring omissions. What about the
African elephants with which Hannibal's armies crossed the Alps? What
about the Asian elephants still used as work animals in Southeast Asia
today? No, I didn't forget them, and that raises an important distinction.
Elephants have been tamed, but never domesticated. Hannibal's elephants
were, and Asian work elephants are, just wild elephants that were cap
tured and tamed; they were not bred in captivity. In contrast, a domesti
cated animal is defined as an animal selectively bred in captivity and
thereby modified from its wild ancestors, for use by humans who control
the animal's breeding and food supply.
That is, domestication involves wild animals' being transformed into
something more useful to humans. Truly domesticated animals differ in
various ways from their wild ancestors. These differences result from two
processes: human selection of those individual animals more useful to
humans than other individuals of the same species, and automatic evolu
tionary responses of animals to the altered forces of natural selection
operating in human environments as compared with wild environments.
We already saw in Chapter 7 that all of these statements also apply to
plant domestication.
The ways in which domesticated animals have diverged from their wild
ancestors include the following. Many species changed in size: cows, pigs,
and sheep became smaller under domestication, while guinea pigs became
larger. Sheep and alpacas were selected for retention of wool and reduc
tion or loss of hair, while cows have been selected for high milk yields.
Several species of domestic animals have smaller brains and less developed
sense organs than their wild ancestors, because they no longer need the
bigger brains and more developed sense organs on which their ancestors
depended to escape from wild predators.
To appreciate the changes that developed under domestication, just