250 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
couraged innovation then, whereas high wages or labor scarcity now stim
ulate the search for technological solutions. For example, the prospect of
changed immigration policies that would cut off the supply of cheap Mexi
can seasonal labor to Californian farms was the immediate incentive for
the development of a machine-harvestable variety of tomatoes in Califor
nia. (2) Patents and other property laws, protecting ownership rights of
inventors, reward innovation in the modern West, while the lack of such
protection discourages it in modern China. (3) Modern industrial societies
provide extensive opportunities for technical training, as medieval Islam
did and modern Zaire does not. (4) Modern capitalism is, and the ancient
Roman economy was not, organized in a way that made it potentially
rewarding to invest capital in technological development. (5) The strong
individualism of U.S. society allows successful inventors to keep earnings
for themselves, whereas strong family ties in New Guinea ensure that
someone who begins to earn money will be joined by a dozen relatives
expecting to move in and be fed and supported.
Another four suggested explanations are ideological, rather than eco
nomic or organizational: (1) Risk-taking behavior, essential for efforts at
innovation, is more widespread in some societies than in others. (2) The
scientific outlook is a unique feature of post-Renaissance European society
that has contributed heavily to its modern technological preeminence. (3)
Tolerance of diverse views and of heretics fosters innovation, whereas a
strongly traditional outlook (as in China's emphasis on ancient Chinese
classics) stifles it. (4) Religions vary greatly in their relation to technologi
cal innovation: some branches of Judaism and Christianity are claimed to
be especially compatible with it, while some branches of Islam, Hinduism,
and Brahmanism may be especially incompatible with it.
All ten of these hypotheses are plausible. But none of them has any
necessary association with geography. If patent rights, capitalism, and cer
tain religions do promote technology, what selected for those factors in
postmedieval Europe but not in contemporary China or India?
At least the direction in which those ten factors influence technology
seems clear. The remaining four proposed factors—war, centralized gov
ernment, climate, and resource abundance—appear to act inconsistently:
sometimes they stimulate technology, sometimes they inhibit it. (1)
Throughout history, war has often been a leading stimulant of technologi
cal innovation. For instance, the enormous investments made in nuclear
weapons during World War II and in airplanes and trucks during World