256 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
When societies do adopt a new technology from the society that
invented it, the diffusion may occur in many different contexts. They
include peaceful trade (as in the spread of transistors from the United
States to Japan in 1954), espionage (the smuggling of silkworms from
Southeast Asia to the Mideast in A.D. 552), emigration (the spread of
French glass and clothing manufacturing techniques over Europe by the
200,000 Huguenots expelled from France in 1685), and war. A crucial
case of the last was the transfer of Chinese papermaking techniques to
Islam, made possible when an Arab army defeated a Chinese army at the
battle of Talas River in Central Asia in A.D. 751, found some papermakers
among the prisoners of war, and brought them to Samarkand to set up
paper manufacture.
In Chapter 12 we saw that cultural diffusion can involve either detailed
"blueprints" or just vague ideas stimulating a reinvention of details. While
Chapter 12 illustrated those alternatives for the spread of writing, they
also apply to the diffusion of technology. The preceding paragraph gave
examples of blueprint copying, whereas the transfer of Chinese porcelain
technology to Europe provides an instance of long-drawn-out idea diffu
sion. Porcelain, a fine-grained translucent pottery, was invented in China
around the 7th century A.D. When it began to reach Europe by the Silk
Road in the 14th century (with no information about how it was manufac
tured), it was much admired, and many unsuccessful attempts were made
to imitate it. Not until 1707 did the German alchemist Johann Bottger,
after lengthy experiments with processes and with mixing various minerals
and clays together, hit upon the solution and establish the now famous
Meissen porcelain works. More or less independent later experiments in
France and England led to Sevres, Wedgwood, and Spode porcelains.
Thus, European potters had to reinvent Chinese manufacturing methods
for themselves, but they were stimulated to do so by having models of the
desired product before them.
DEPENDING ON THEIR geographic location, societies differ in how
readily they can receive technology by diffusion from other societies. The
most isolated people on Earth in recent history were the Aboriginal Tasma
nians, living without oceangoing watercraft on an island 100 miles from
Australia, itself the most isolated continent. The Tasmanians had no con
tact with other societies for 10,000 years and acquired no new technology