1 74 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
all the social antelope species for which Africa is famous from being
domesticated. While one's first association to African antelope is "vast
dense herds spreading across the horizon," in fact the males of those herds
space themselves into territories and fight fiercely with each other when
breeding. Hence those antelope cannot be maintained in crowded enclo
sures in captivity, as can sheep or goats or cattle. Territorial behavior simi
larly combines with a fierce disposition and a slow growth rate to banish
rhinos from the farmyard.
Finally, many herd species, including again most deer and antelope, do
not have a well-defined dominance hierarchy and are not instinctively pre
pared to become imprinted on a dominant leader (hence to become misim¬
printed on humans). As a result, though many deer and antelope species
have been tamed (think of all those true Bambi stories), one never sees
such tame deer and antelope driven in herds like sheep. That problem also
derailed domestication of North American bighorn sheep, which belong to
the same genus as Asiatic mouflon sheep, ancestor of our domestic sheep.
Bighorn sheep are suitable to us and similar to mouflons in most respects
except a crucial one: they lack the mouflon's stereotypical behavior
whereby some individuals behave submissively toward other individuals
whose dominance they acknowledge.
LET'S NOW RETURN to the problem I posed at the outset of this chapter.
Initially, one of the most puzzling features of animal domestication is the
seeming arbitrariness with which some species have been domesticated
while their close relatives have not. It turns out that all but a few candi
dates for domestication have been eliminated by the Anna Karenina princi
ple. Humans and most animal species make an unhappy marriage, for one
or more of many possible reasons: the animal's diet, growth rate, mating
habits, disposition, tendency to panic, and several distinct features of
social organization. Only a small percentage of wild mammal species
ended up in happy marriages with humans, by virtue of compatibility on
all those separate counts.
Eurasian peoples happened to inherit many more species of domes
ticable large wild mammalian herbivores than did peoples of the other
continents. That outcome, with all of its momentous advantages for Eur
asian societies, stemmed from three basic facts of mammalian geography,
history, and biology. First, Eurasia, befitting its large area and ecological