NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 53
ing, became silversmiths and ranchers, and now drive trucks while
continuing to live in traditional dwellings.
Among the supposedly conservative Aboriginal Australians as well,
there are receptive societies along with conservative ones. At the one
extreme, the Tasmanians continued to use stone tools superseded tens of
thousands of years earlier in Europe and replaced in most of mainland
Australia too. At the opposite extreme, some aboriginal fishing groups of
southeastern Australia devised elaborate technologies for managing fish
populations, including the construction of canals, weirs, and standing
traps.
Thus, the development and reception of inventions vary enormously
from society to society on the same continent. They also vary over time
within the same society. Nowadays, Islamic societies in the Middle East are
relatively conservative and not at the forefront of technology. But medieval
Islam in the same region was technologically advanced and open to inno
vation. It achieved far higher literacy rates than contemporary Europe; it
assimilated the legacy of classical Greek civilization to such a degree that
many classical Greek books are now known to us only through Arabic
copies; it invented or elaborated windmills, tidal mills, trigonometry, and
lateen sails; it made major advances in metallurgy, mechanical and chemi
cal engineering, and irrigation methods; and it adopted paper and gun
powder from China and transmitted them to Europe. In the Middle Ages
the flow of technology was overwhelmingly from Islam to Europe, rather
than from Europe to Islam as it is today. Only after around A.D. 1500 did
the net direction of flow begin to reverse.
Innovation in China too fluctuated markedly with time. Until around
A.D. 1450, China was technologically much more innovative and
advanced than Europe, even more so than medieval Islam. The long list of
Chinese inventions includes canal lock gates, cast iron, deep drilling, effi
cient animal harnesses, gunpowder, kites, magnetic compasses, movable
type, paper, porcelain, printing (except for the Phaistos disk), sternpost
rudders, and wheelbarrows. China then ceased to be innovative for rea
sons about which we shall speculate in the Epilogue. Conversely, we think
of western Europe and its derived North American societies as leading
the modern world in technological innovation, but technology was less
advanced in western Europe than in any other "civilized" area of the Old
World until the late Middle Ages.