I I 8 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
tion to generation. Similarly, supermarket apples are typically around
three inches in diameter, wild apples only one inch. The oldest corn cobs
are barely more than half an inch long, but Mexican Indian farmers of
A.D. 1500 already had developed six-inch cobs, and some modern cobs are
one and a half feet long.
Another obvious difference between seeds that we grow and many of
their wild ancestors is in bitterness. Many wild seeds evolved to be bitter,
bad-tasting, or actually poisonous, in order to deter animals from eating
them. Thus, natural selection acts oppositely on seeds and on fruits. Plants
whose fruits are tasty get their seeds dispersed by animals, but the seed
itself within the fruit has to be bad-tasting. Otherwise, the animal would
also chew up the seed, and it couldn't sprout.
Almonds provide a striking example of bitter seeds and their change
under domestication. Most wild almond seeds contain an intensely bitter
chemical called amygdalin, which (as was already mentioned) breaks
down to yield the poison cyanide. A snack of wild almonds can kill a
person foolish enough to ignore the warning of the bitter taste. Since the
first stage in unconscious domestication involves gathering seeds to eat,
how on earth did domestication of wild almonds ever reach that first
stage?
The explanation is that occasional individual almond trees have a muta
tion in a single gene that prevents them from synthesizing the bitter-tasting
amygdalin. Such trees die out in the wild without leaving any progeny,
because birds discover and eat all their seeds. But curious or hungry chil
dren of early farmers, nibbling wild plants around them, would eventually
have sampled and noticed those nonbitter almond trees. (In the same way,
European peasants today still recognize and appreciate occasional individ
ual oak trees whose acorns are sweet rather than bitter.) Those nonbitter
almond seeds are the only ones that ancient farmers would have planted,
at first unintentionally in their garbage heaps and later intentionally in
their orchards.
Already by 8000 B.C. wild almonds show up in excavated archaeologi
cal sites in Greece. By 3000 B.C. they were being domesticated in lands of
the eastern Mediterranean. When the Egyptian king Tutankhamen died,
around 1325 B.C., almonds were one of the foods left in his famous tomb
to nourish him in the afterlife. Lima beans, watermelons, potatoes, egg
plants, and cabbages are among the many other familiar crops whose wild
ancestors were bitter or poisonous, and of which occasional sweet individ-