1 3 2. • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
are many fewer species of them than of plants. The world holds only about
148 species of large wild mammalian terrestrial herbivores or omnivores,
the large mammals that could be considered candidates for domestication.
Only a modest number of factors determines whether a mammal is suitable
for domestication. It's thus straightforward to review a region's big mam
mals and to test whether the lack of mammal domestication in some
regions was due to the unavailability of suitable wild species, rather than
to local peoples.
That approach would be much more difficult to apply to plants because
of the sheer number—200,000—of species of wild flowering plants, the
plants that dominate vegetation on the land and that have furnished
almost all of our crops. We can't possibly hope to examine all the wild
plant species of even a circumscribed area like California, and to assess
how many of them would have been domesticable. But we shall now see
how to get around that problem.
WHEN ONE HEARS that there are so many species of flowering plants,
one's first reaction might be as follows: surely, with all those wild plant
species on Earth, any area with a sufficiently benign climate must have
had more than enough species to provide plenty of candidates for crop
development.
But then reflect that the vast majority of wild plants are unsuitable for
obvious reasons: they are woody, they produce no edible fruit, and their
leaves and roots are also inedible. Of the 200,000 wild plant species, only
a few thousand are eaten by humans, and just a few hundred of these have
been more or less domesticated. Even of these several hundred crops, most
provide minor supplements to our diet and would not by themselves have
sufficed to support the rise of civilizations. A mere dozen species account
for over 80 percent of the modern world's annual tonnage of all crops.
Those dozen blockbusters are the cereals wheat, corn, rice, barley, and
sorghum; the pulse soybean; the roots or tubers potato, manioc, and sweet
potato; the sugar sources sugarcane and sugar beet; and the fruit banana.
Cereal crops alone now account for more than half of the calories con
sumed by the world's human populations. With so few major crops in the
world, all of them domesticated thousands of years ago, it's less surprising
that many areas of the world had no wild native plants at all of outstand
ing potential. Our failure to domesticate even a single major new food