HOW TO MAKE AN ALMOND • 1 21
could be lethal if all the seeds sprouted quickly and simultaneously. Were
that to happen, the seedlings might all be killed by a single drought or
frost, leaving no seeds to propagate the species. Hence many annual plants
have evolved to hedge their bets by means of germination inhibitors, which
make seeds initially dormant and spread out their germination over several
years. In that way, even if most seedlings are killed by a bout of bad
weather, some seeds will be left to germinate later.
A common bet-hedging adaptation by which wild plants achieve that
result is to enclose their seeds in a thick coat or armor. The many wild
plants with such adaptations include wheat, barley, peas, flax, and sun
flowers. While such late-sprouting seeds still have the opportunity to ger
minate in the wild, consider what must have happened as farming
developed. Early farmers would have discovered by trial and error that
they could obtain higher yields by tilling and watering the soil and then
sowing seeds. When that happened, seeds that immediately sprouted grew
into plants whose seeds were harvested and planted in the next year. But
many of the wild seeds did not immediately sprout, and they yielded no
harvest.
Occasional mutant individuals among wild plants lacked thick seed
coats or other inhibitors of germination. All such mutants promptly
sprouted and yielded harvested mutant seeds. Early farmers wouldn't have
noticed the difference, in the way that they did notice and selectively har
vest big berries. But the cycle of sow / grow / harvest / sow would have
selected immediately and unconsciously for the mutants. Like the changes
in seed dispersal, these changes in germination inhibition characterize
wheat, barley, peas, and many other crops compared with their wild ances
tors.
The remaining major type of change invisible to early farmers involved
plant reproduction. A general problem in crop development is that occa
sional mutant plant individuals are more useful to humans (for example,
because of bigger or less bitter seeds) than are normal individuals. If those
desirable mutants proceeded to interbreed with normal plants, the muta
tion would immediately be diluted or lost. Under what circumstances
would it remain preserved for early farmers?
For plants that reproduce themselves, the mutant would automatically
be preserved. That's true of plants that reproduce vegetatively (from a
tuber or root of the parent plant), or that are hermaphrodites capable of
fertilizing themselves. But the vast majority of wild plants don't reproduce