42 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
after New Guinea itself, by around 35,000 years ago. Those islands were
New Britain and New Ireland, in the Bismarck Archipelago, and Buka, in
the Solomon Archipelago. Buka lies out of sight of the closest island to the
west and could have been reached only by crossing a water gap of about
100 miles. Thus, early Australians and New Guineans were probably
capable of intentionally traveling over water to visible islands, and were
using watercraft sufficiently often that the colonization of even invisible
distant islands was repeatedly achieved unintentionally.
The settlement of Australia / New Guinea was perhaps associated with
still another big first, besides humans' first use of watercraft and first range
extension since reaching Eurasia: the first mass extermination of large ani
mal species by humans. Today, we regard Africa as the continent of big
mammals. Modern Eurasia also has many species of big mammals (though
not in the manifest abundance of Africa's Serengeti Plains), such as Asia's
rhinos and elephants and tigers, and Europe's moose and bears and (until
classical times) lions. Australia / New Guinea today has no equally large
mammals, in fact no mammal larger than 100-pound kangaroos. But Aus
tralia / New Guinea formerly had its own suite of diverse big mammals,
including giant kangaroos, rhinolike marsupials called diprotodonts and
reaching the size of a cow, and a marsupial "leopard." It also formerly had
a 400-pound ostrichlike flightless bird, plus some impressively big reptiles,
including a one-ton lizard, a giant python, and land-dwelling crocodiles.
All of those Australian / New Guinean giants (the so-called megafauna)
disappeared after the arrival of humans. While there has been controversy
about the exact timing of their demise, several Australian archaeological
sites, with dates extending over tens of thousands of years, and with prodi
giously abundant deposits of animal bones, have been carefully excavated
and found to contain not a trace of the now extinct giants over the last
35,000 years. Hence the megafauna probably became extinct soon after
humans reached Australia.
The near-simultaneous disappearance of so many large species raises an
obvious question: what caused it? An obvious possible answer is that they
were killed off or else eliminated indirectly by the first arriving humans.
Recall that Australian / New Guinean animals had evolved for millions of
years in the absence of human hunters. We know that Galapagos and Ant
arctic birds and mammals, which similarly evolved in the absence of
humans and did not see humans until modern times, are still incurably
tame today. They would have been exterminated if conservationists had