NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 55
apparently only once in world history. Other difficult inventions include
the water wheel, rotary quern, tooth gearing, magnetic compass, windmill,
and camera obscura, all of which were invented only once or twice in the
Old World and never in the New World.
Such complex inventions were usually acquired by borrowing, because
they spread more rapidly than they could be independently invented
locally. A clear example is the wheel, which is first attested around 3400
B.C. near the Black Sea, and then turns up within the next few centuries
over much of Europe and Asia. All those early Old World wheels are of a
peculiar design: a solid wooden circle constructed of three planks fastened
together, rather than a rim with spokes. In contrast, the sole wheels of
Native American societies (depicted on Mexican ceramic vessels) consisted
of a single piece, suggesting a second independent invention of the wheel—
as one would expect from other evidence for the isolation of New World
from Old World civilizations.
No one thinks that that same peculiar Old World wheel design
appeared repeatedly by chance at many separate sites of the Old World
within a few centuries of each other, after 7 million years of wheelless
human history. Instead, the utility of the wheel surely caused it to diffuse
rapidly east and west over the Old World from its sole site of invention.
Other examples of complex technologies that diffused east and west in the
ancient Old World, from a single West Asian source, include door locks,
pulleys, rotary querns, windmills—and the alphabet. A New World exam
ple of technological diffusion is metallurgy, which spread from the Andes
via Panama to Mesoamerica.
When a widely useful invention does crop up in one society, it then
tends to spread in either of two ways. One way is that other societies see
or learn of the invention, are receptive to it, and adopt it. The second is
that societies lacking the invention find themselves at a disadvantage vis
a-vis the inventing society, and they become overwhelmed and replaced if
the disadvantage is sufficiently great. A simple example is the spread of
muskets among New Zealand's Maori tribes. One tribe, the Ngapuhi,
adopted muskets from European traders around 1818. Over the course of
the next 15 years, New Zealand was convulsed by the so-called Musket
Wars, as musketless tribes either acquired muskets or were subjugated by
tribes already armed with them. The outcome was that musket technology
had spread throughout the whole of New Zealand by 1833: all surviving
Maori tribes now had muskets.