4 3° " FURTHER READINGS
material but is written for the general reader rather than for specialists.
Another convenient source is a series of five volumes entitled The Illus
trated History of Humankind, ed. Goran Burenhult (San Francisco: Har
perCollins, 1993-94). The five individual volumes in this series are enti
tled, respectively, The First Humans, People of the Stone Age, Old World
Civilizations, New World and Pacific Civilizations, and Traditional Peo
ples Today.
Several series of volumes published by Cambridge University Press
(Cambridge, England, various dates) provide histories of particular
regions or eras. One series consists of books entitled The Cambridge His
tory of [X], where X is variously Africa, Early Inner Asia, China, India,
Iran, Islam, Japan, Latin America, Poland, and Southeast Asia. Another
series is The Cambridge Encyclopedia of [X], where X is variously Africa,
China, Japan, Latin America and the Caribbean, Russia and the former
Soviet Union, Australia, the Middle East and North Africa, and India,
Pakistan, and adjacent countries. Still other series include The Cambridge
Ancient History, The Cambridge Medieval History, The Cambridge Mod
ern History, The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, and The Cam
bridge Economic History of India.
Three encyclopedic accounts of the world's languages are Barbara
Grimes, Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 13th ed. (Dallas: Summer
Institute of Linguistics, 1996), Merritt Ruhlen, A Guide to the World's
Languages, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987), and C. F. Voegelin
and F. M. Voegelin, Classification and Index of the World's Languages
(New York: Elsevier, 1977).
Among large-scale comparative histories, Arnold Toynbee, A Study of
History, 12 vols. (London: Oxford University Press, 1934-54), stands out.
An excellent history of Eurasian civilization, especially western Eurasian
civilization, is William McNeill, The Rise of the West (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1991). The same author's A World History (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1979), despite its title, also maintains a focus on
western Eurasian civilization, as does V. Gordon Childe, What Happened
in History, rev. ed. (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1954). Another compara
tive history with a focus on western Eurasia, C. D. Darlington, The Evolu
tion of Man and Society (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1969), is by a
biologist who recognizes some of the same links between continental his
tory and domestication that I discuss. Two books by Alfred Crosby are