BLUEPRINTS AND BORROWED LETTERS • 227
1700 B.c., though, Semites familiar with Egyptian hieroglyphs did begin
to experiment with that logical step.
Restricting signs to those for single consonants was only the first of
three crucial innovations that distinguished alphabets from other writing
systems. The second was to help users memorize the alphabet by placing
the letters in a fixed sequence and giving them easy-to-remember names.
Our English names are mostly meaningless monosyllables ("a," "bee,"
"cee," "dee," and so on). But the Semitic names did possess meaning in
Semitic languages: they were the words for familiar objects ('aleph = ox,
beth = house, gimel = camel, daleth = door, and so on). These Semitic
words were related "acrophonically" to the Semitic consonants to which
they refer: that is, the first letter of the word for the object was also the
letter named for the object ('a, b, g, d, and so on). In addition, the earliest
forms of the Semitic letters appear in many cases to have been pictures of
those same objects. All these features made the forms, names, and
sequence of Semitic alphabet letters easy to remember. Many modern al­
phabets, including ours, retain with minor modifications that original
sequence (and, in the case of Greek, even the letters' original names: alpha,
beta, gamma, delta, and so on) over 3,000 years later. One minor modifi­
cation that readers will already have noticed is that the Semitic and Greek
g became the Roman and English c, while the Romans invented a new g
in its present position.
The third and last innovation leading to modern alphabets was to pro­
vide for vowels. Already in the early days of the Semitic alphabet, experi­
ments began with methods for writing vowels by adding small extra letters
to indicate selected vowels, or else by dots, lines, or hooks sprinkled over
the consonantal letters. In the eighth century B.C. the Greeks became the
first people to indicate all vowels systematically by the same types of letters
used for consonants. Greeks derived the forms of their vowel letters α - ε -
n - i - o by "co-opting" five letters used in the Phoenician alphabet for
consonantal sounds lacking in Greek.
From those earliest Semitic alphabets, one line of blueprint copying and
evolutionary modification led via early Arabian alphabets to the modern
Ethiopian alphabet. A far more important line evolved by way of the Ara­
maic alphabet, used for official documents of the Persian Empire, into the
modern Arabic, Hebrew, Indian, and Southeast Asian alphabets. But the
line most familiar to European and American readers is the one that led
via the Phoenicians to the Greeks by the early eighth century B.C., thence