COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA • 69
flavor of those events, let us relive them by weaving together excerpts from
eyewitness accounts by six of Pizarro's companions, including his brothers
Hernando and Pedro:
"The prudence, fortitude, military discipline, labors, perilous naviga
tions, and battles of the Spaniards—vassals of the most invincible Emperor
of the Roman Catholic Empire, our natural King and Lord—will cause joy
to the faithful and terror to the infidels. For this reason, and for the glory
of God our Lord and for the service of the Catholic Imperial Majesty, it
has seemed good to me to write this narrative, and to send it to Your
Majesty, that all may have a knowledge of what is here related. It will be
to the glory of God, because they have conquered and brought to our holy
Catholic Faith so vast a number of heathens, aided by His holy guidance.
It will be to the honor of our Emperor because, by reason of his great
power and good fortune, such events happened in his time. It will give joy
to the faithful that such battles have been won, such provinces discovered
and conquered, such riches brought home for the King and for themselves;
and that such terror has been spread among the infidels, such admiration
excited in all mankind.
"For when, either in ancient or modern times, have such great exploits
been achieved by so few against so many, over so many climes, across so
many seas, over such distances by land, to subdue the unseen and
unknown? Whose deeds can be compared with those of Spain? Our Span
iards, being few in number, never having more than 200 or 300 men
together, and sometimes only 100 and even fewer, have, in our times, con
quered more territory than has ever been known before, or than all the
faithful and infidel princes possess. I will only write, at present, of what
befell in the conquest, and I will not write much, in order to avoid pro
lixity.
"Governor Pizarro wished to obtain intelligence from some Indians
who had come from Cajamarca, so he had them tortured. They confessed
that they had heard that Atahuallpa was waiting for the Governor at Caja
marca. The Governor then ordered us to advance. On reaching the
entrance to Cajamarca, we saw the camp of Atahuallpa at a distance of a
league, in the skirts of the mountains. The Indians' camp looked like a
very beautiful city. They had so many tents that we were all filled with
great apprehension. Until then, we had never seen anything like this in the
Indies. It filled all our Spaniards with fear and confusion. But we could
not show any fear or turn back, for if the Indians had sensed any weakness
in us, even the Indians that we were bringing with us as guides would have