TO FARM OR NOT TO FARM • 109
wholesale in southeastern and central Europe because the hunter-gatherer
lifestyle there was less productive and less competitive. In contrast, food
production was adopted piecemeal in southwestern Europe (southern
France, Spain, and Italy), where sheep arrived first and cereals later. The
adoption of intensive food production from the Asian mainland was also
very slow and piecemeal in Japan, probably because the hunter-gatherer
lifestyle based on seafood and local plants was so productive there.
Just as a hunting-gathering lifestyle can be traded piecemeal for a food-
producing lifestyle, one system of food production can also be traded
piecemeal for another. For example, Indians of the eastern United States
were domesticating local plants by about 2500 B.C. but had trade connec
tions with Mexican Indians who developed a more productive crop system
based on the trinity of corn, squash, and beans. Eastern U.S. Indians
adopted Mexican crops, and many of them discarded many of their local
domesticates, piecemeal; squash was domesticated independently, corn
arrived from Mexico around A.D. 200 but remained a minor crop until
around A.D. 900, and beans arrived a century or two later. It even hap
pened that food-production systems were abandoned in favor of hunting-
gathering. For instance, around 3000 B.C. the hunter-gatherers of southern
Sweden adopted farming based on Southwest Asian crops, but abandoned
it around 2700 B.C. and reverted to hunting-gathering for 400 years before
resuming farming.
ALL THESE CONSIDERATIONS make it clear that we should not sup
pose that the decision to adopt farming was made in a vacuum, as if the
people had previously had no means to feed themselves. Instead, we must
consider food production and hunting-gathering as alternative strategies
competing with each other. Mixed economies that added certain crops or
livestock to hunting-gathering also competed against both types of "pure"
economies, and against mixed economies with higher or lower proportions
of food production. Nevertheless, over the last 10,000 years, the predomi
nant result has been a shift from hunting-gathering to food production.
Hence we must ask: What were the factors that tipped the competitive
advantage away from the former and toward the latter?
That question continues to be debated by archaeologists and anthropol
ogists. One reason for its remaining unsettled is that different factors may
have been decisive in different parts of the world. Another has been the