HISTORY'S HAVES AND HAVE-NOTS • 103
there can be no doubt about population replacement because the newly
arriving food producers differed markedly in their skeletons from the
hunter-gatherers whom they replaced, and because the food producers
introduced not only crops and animals but also pottery. Later chapters will
describe the two clearest such examples: the Austronesian expansion from
South China into the Philippines and Indonesia (Chapter 17), and the
Bantu expansion over subequatorial Africa (Chapter 19).
Southeastern Europe and central Europe present a similar picture of an
abrupt onset of food production (dependent on Southwest Asian crops
and animals) and of pottery making. This onset too probably involved
replacement of old Greeks and Germans by new Greeks and Germans, just
as old gave way to new in the Philippines, Indonesia, and subequatorial
Africa. However, the skeletal differences between the earlier hunter-gath
erers and the farmers who replaced them are less marked in Europe than
in the Philippines, Indonesia, and subequatorial Africa. Hence the case for
population replacement in Europe is less strong or less direct.
IN SHORT, ONLY a few areas of the world developed food production
independently, and they did so at widely differing times. From those
nuclear areas, hunter-gatherers of some neighboring areas learned food
production, and peoples of other neighboring areas were replaced by
invading food producers from the nuclear areas—again at widely differing
times. Finally, peoples of some areas ecologically suitable for food produc
tion neither evolved nor acquired agriculture in prehistoric times at all;
they persisted as hunter-gatherers until the modern world finally swept
upon them. The peoples of areas with a head start on food production
thereby gained a head start on the path leading toward guns, germs, and
steel. The result was a long series of collisions between the haves and the
have-nots of history.
How can we explain these geographic differences in the times and
modes of onset of food production? That question, one of the most
important problems of prehistory, will be the subject of the next five chap
ters.