YALI'S QUESTION • 2 1
major cause of death, while murders were relatively uncommon and a state
of war was the exception rather than the rule. Most Europeans who
escaped fatal infections also escaped other potential causes of death and
proceeded to pass on their genes. Today, most live-born Western infants
survive fatal infections as well and reproduce themselves, regardless of
their intelligence and the genes they bear. In contrast, New Guineans have
been living in societies where human numbers were too low for epidemic
diseases of dense populations to evolve. Instead, traditional New Guineans
suffered high mortality from murder, chronic tribal warfare, accidents,
and problems in procuring food.
Intelligent people are likelier than less intelligent ones to escape those
causes of high mortality in traditional New Guinea societies. However,
the differential mortality from epidemic diseases in traditional European
societies had little to do with intelligence, and instead involved genetic
resistance dependent on details of body chemistry. For example, people
with blood group B or O have a greater resistance to smallpox than do
people with blood group A. That is, natural selection promoting genes for
intelligence has probably been far more ruthless in New Guinea than in
more densely populated, politically complex societies, where natural selec
tion for body chemistry was instead more potent.
Besides this genetic reason, there is also a second reason why New
Guineans may have come to be smarter than Westerners. Modern Euro
pean and American children spend much of their time being passively
entertained by television, radio, and movies. In the average American
household, the TV set is on for seven hours per day. In contrast, traditional
New Guinea children have virtually no such opportunities for passive
entertainment and instead spend almost all of their waking hours actively
doing something, such as talking or playing with other children or adults.
Almost all studies of child development emphasize the role of childhood
stimulation and activity in promoting mental development, and stress the
irreversible mental stunting associated with reduced childhood stimula
tion. This effect surely contributes a non-genetic component to the supe
rior average mental function displayed by New Guineans.
That is, in mental ability New Guineans are probably genetically supe
rior to Westerners, and they surely are superior in escaping the devastating
developmental disadvantages under which most children in industrialized
societies now grow up. Certainly, there is no hint at all of any intellectual
disadvantage of New Guineans that could serve to answer Yali's question.