336 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Pacific. Wiwor's highlanders are probably descended from an early wave
that had colonized New Guinea from Asia by 40,000 years ago. Achmad's
ancestors arrived in Java ultimately from the South China coast, around
4,000 years ago, completing the replacement there of people related to
Wiwor's ancestors. Sauakari's ancestors reached New Guinea around
3,600 years ago, as part of that same wave from the South China coast,
while Ping Wah's ancestors still occupy China.
The population movement that brought Achmad's and Sauakari's
ancestors to Java and New Guinea, respectively, termed the Austronesian
expansion, was among the biggest population movements of the last 6,000
years. One prong of it became the Polynesians, who populated the most
remote islands of the Pacific and were the greatest seafarers among Neo
lithic peoples. Austronesian languages are spoken today as native lan
guages over more than half of the globe's span, from Madagascar to Easter
Island. In this book on human population movements since the end of the
Ice Ages, the Austronesian expansion occupies a central place, as one of
the most important phenomena to be explained. Why did Austronesian
people, stemming ultimately from mainland China, colonize Java and the
rest of Indonesia and replace the original inhabitants there, instead of
Indonesians colonizing China and replacing the Chinese? Having occupied
all of Indonesia, why were the Austronesians then unable to occupy more
than a narrow coastal strip of the New Guinea lowlands, and why were
they completely unable to displace Wiwor's people from the New Guinea
highlands? How did the descendants of Chinese emigrants become trans
formed into Polynesians?
TODAY, THE POPULATION of Java, most other Indonesian islands
(except the easternmost ones), and the Philippines is rather homogeneous.
In appearance and genes those islands' inhabitants are similar to South
Chinese, and even more similar to tropical Southeast Asians, especially
those of the Malay Peninsula. Their languages are equally homogeneous:
while 374 languages are spoken in the Philippines and western and central
Indonesia, all of them are closely related and fall within the same sub-
subfamily (Western Malayo-Polynesian) of the Austronesian language
family. Austronesian languages reached the Asian mainland on the Malay
Peninsula and in small pockets in Vietnam and Cambodia, near the west
ernmost Indonesian islands of Sumatra and Borneo, but they occur
nowhere else on the mainland (Figure 17.1). Some Austronesian words