HOW AFRICA BECAME BLACK • 391
as bananas and Asian yams. Evidently, those crops reached southern Nige
ria only after languages began to break up into subgroups, so each sub
group coined or received different names for the new plants, which the
modern languages of only that particular subgroup inherited. Last come
crop names that aren't consistent within language groups at all, but instead
follow trade routes. These prove to be New World crops like corn and
peanuts, which we know were introduced into Africa after the beginnings
of transatlantic ship traffic (A.D. 1492) and diffused since then along trade
routes, often bearing their Portuguese or other foreign names.
Thus, even if we possessed no botanical or archaeological evidence
whatsoever, we would still be able to deduce from the linguistic evidence
alone that native West African crops were domesticated first, that Indone
sian crops arrived next, and that finally the European introductions came
in. The UCLA historian Christopher Ehret has applied this linguistic
approach to determining the sequence in which domestic plants and ani
mals became utilized by the people of each African language family. By a
method termed glottochronology, based on calculations of how rapidly
words tend to change over historical time, comparative linguistics can even
yield estimated dates for domestications or crop arrivals.
Putting together direct archaeological evidence of crops with the more
indirect linguistic evidence, we deduce that the people who were domesti
cating sorghum and millet in the Sahara thousands of years ago spoke
languages ancestral to modern Nilo-Saharan languages. Similarly, the peo
ple who first domesticated wet-country crops of West Africa spoke lan
guages ancestral to the modern Niger-Congo languages. Finally, speakers
of ancestral Afroasiatic languages may have been involved in domesticat
ing the crops native to Ethiopia, and they certainly introduced Fertile Cres
cent crops to North Africa.
Thus, the evidence derived from plant names in modern African lan
guages permits us to glimpse the existence of three languages being spoken
in Africa thousands of years ago: ancestral Nilo-Saharan, ancestral Niger-
Congo, and ancestral Afroasiatic. In addition, we can glimpse the exis
tence of ancestral Khoisan from other linguistic evidence, though not that
of crop names (because ancestral Khoisan people domesticated no crops).
Now surely, since Africa harbors 1,500 languages today, it is big enough
to have harbored more than four ancestral languages thousands of years
ago. But all those other languages must have disappeared—either because
the people speaking them survived but lost their original language, like the