APPLES OR INDIANS • 145
and brought to the site by its residents. The scientists analyzed over 700
samples, each containing an average of over 500 identifiable seeds belong
ing to over 70 plant species. It turned out that the villagers were collecting
a prodigious variety (157 species!) of plants identified by their charred
seeds, not to mention other plants that cannot now be identified.
Were those naive villagers collecting every type of seed plant that they
found, bringing it home, poisoning themselves on most of the species, and
nourishing themselves from only a few species? No, they were not so silly.
While 157 species sounds like indiscriminate collecting, many more species
growing wild in the vicinity were absent from the charred remains. The
157 selected species fall into three categories. Many of them have seeds
that are nonpoisonous and immediately edible. Others, such as pulses and
members of the mustard family, have toxic seeds, but the toxins are easily
removed, leaving the seeds edible. A few seeds belong to species tradition
ally used as sources of dyes or medicine. The many wild species not repre
sented among the 157 selected are ones that would have been useless or
harmful to people, including all of the most toxic weed species in the envi
ronment.
Thus, the hunter-gatherers of Tell Abu Hureyra were not wasting time
and endangering themselves by collecting wild plants indiscriminately.
Instead, they evidently knew the local wild plants as intimately as do mod
ern New Guineans, and they used that knowledge to select and bring home
only the most useful available seed plants. But those gathered seeds would
have constituted the material for the unconscious first steps of plant
domestication.
My other example of how ancient peoples apparently used their ethno¬
biological knowledge to good effect comes from the Jordan Valley in the
ninth millennium B.C., the period of the earliest crop cultivation there. The
valley's first domesticated cereals were barley and emmer wheat, which are
still among the world's most productive crops today. But, as at Tell Abu
Hureyra, hundreds of other seed-bearing wild plant species must have
grown in the vicinity, and a hundred or more of them would have been
edible and gathered before the rise of plant domestication. What was it
about barley and emmer wheat that caused them to be the first crops?
Were those first Jordan Valley farmers botanical ignoramuses who didn't
know what they were doing? Or were barley and emmer wheat actually
the best of the local wild cereals that they could have selected?
Two Israeli scientists, Ofer Bar-Yosef and Mordechai Kislev, tackled this