FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 2 8 I
formed by amalgamation or conquest of states—are regularly multiethnic
and multilingual. State bureaucrats are not selected mainly on the basis of
kinship, as in chiefdoms, but are professionals selected at least partly on
the basis of training and ability. In later states, including most today, the
leadership often became nonhereditary, and many states abandoned the
entire system of formal hereditary classes carried over from chiefdoms.
OVER THE PAST 13,000 years the predominant trend in human society
has been the replacement of smaller, less complex units by larger, more
complex ones. Obviously, that is no more than an average long-term trend,
with innumerable shifts in either direction: 1,000 amalgamations for 999
reversals. We know from our daily newspaper that large units (for
instance, the former USSR, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia) can disinte
grate into smaller units, as did Alexander of Macedon's empire over 2,000
years ago. More complex units don't always conquer less complex ones
but may succumb to them, as when the Roman and Chinese Empires were
overrun by "barbarian" and Mongol chiefdoms, respectively. But the long-
term trend has still been toward large, complex societies, culminating in
states.
Obviously, too, part of the reason for states' triumphs over simpler enti
ties when the two collide is that states usually enjoy an advantage of weap
onry and other technology, and a large numerical advantage in population.
But there are also two other potential advantages inherent in chiefdoms
and states. First, a centralized decision maker has the advantage at concen
trating troops and resources. Second, the official religions and patriotic
fervor of many states make their troops willing to fight suicidally.
The latter willingness is one so strongly programmed into us citizens of
modern states, by our schools and churches and governments, that we
forget what a radical break it marks with previous human history. Every
state has its slogan urging its citizens to be prepared to die if necessary for
the state: Britain's "For King and Country," Spain's "Por Dios y Espana,"
and so on. Similar sentiments motivated 16th-century Aztec warriors:
"There is nothing like death in war, nothing like the flowery death so
precious to Him [the Aztec national god Huitzilopochtli] who gives life:
far off I see it, my heart yearns for it!"
Such sentiments are unthinkable in bands and tribes. In all the accounts