2 34 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
example, the oldest Sumerian cuneiform writing could not render normal
prose but was a mere telegraphic shorthand, whose vocabulary was
restricted to names, numerals, units of measure, words for objects counted,
and a few adjectives. That's as if a modern American court clerk were
forced to write "John 27 fat sheep," because English writing lacked the
necessary words and grammar to write "We order John to deliver the 27
fat sheep that he owes to the government." Later Sumerian cuneiform did
become capable of rendering prose, but it did so by the messy system that
I've already described, with mixtures of logograms, phonetic signs, and
unpronounced determinatives totaling hundreds of separate signs. Linear
B, the writing of Mycenaean Greece, was at least simpler, being based on
a syllabary of about 90 signs plus logograms. Offsetting that virtue, Linear
B was quite ambiguous. It omitted any consonant at the end of a word,
and it used the same sign for several related consonants (for instance, one
sign for both / and r, another for p and b and ph, and still another for g
and k and kh). We know how confusing we find it when native-born Japa
nese people speak English without distinguishing / and r: imagine the con
fusion if our alphabet did the same while similarly homogenizing the other
consonants that I mentioned! It's as if we were to spell the words "rap,"
"lap," "lab," and "laugh" identically.
A related limitation is that few people ever learned to write these early
scripts. Knowledge of writing was confined to professional scribes in the
employ of the king or temple. For instance, there is no hint that Linear B
was used or understood by any Mycenaean Greek beyond small cadres of
palace bureaucrats. Since individual Linear B scribes can be distinguished
by their handwriting on preserved documents, we can say that all pre
served Linear B documents from the palaces of Knossos and Pylos are the
work of a mere 75 and 40 scribes, respectively.
The uses of these telegraphic, clumsy, ambiguous early scripts were as
restricted as the number of their users. Anyone hoping to discover how
Sumerians of 3000 B.c. thought and felt is in for a disappointment.
Instead, the first Sumerian texts are emotionless accounts of palace and
temple bureaucrats. About 90 percent of the tablets in the earliest known
Sumerian archives, from the city of Uruk, are clerical records of goods
paid in, workers given rations, and agricultural products distributed. Only
later, as Sumerians progressed beyond logograms to phonetic writing, did
they begin to write prose narratives, such as propaganda and myths.
Mycenaean Greeks never even reached that propaganda-and-myths