190 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
spread southward over that distance to Ethiopia, and Bantu food produc
tion spread quickly from Africa's Great Lakes region south to Natal,
because in both cases the intervening areas had similar rainfall regimes
and were suitable for agriculture. In contrast, crop diffusion from Indone
sia south to southwestern Australia was completely impossible, and diffu
sion over the much shorter distance from Mexico to the U.S. Southwest
and Southeast was slow, because the intervening areas were deserts hostile
to agriculture. The lack of a high-elevation plateau in Mesoamerica south
of Guatemala, and Mesoamerica's extreme narrowness south of Mexico
and especially in Panama, were at least as important as the latitudinal
gradient in throttling crop and livestock exchanges between the highlands
of Mexico and the Andes.
Continental differences in axis orientation affected the diffusion not
only of food production but also of other technologies and inventions. For
example, around 3,000 B.C. the invention of the wheel in or near South
west Asia spread rapidly west and east across much of Eurasia within a
few centuries, whereas the wheels invented independently in prehistoric
Mexico never spread south to the Andes. Similarly, the principle of alpha
betic writing, developed in the western part of the Fertile Crescent by 1500
B.C., spread west to Carthage and east to the Indian subcontinent within
about a thousand years, but the Mesoamerican writing systems that flour
ished in prehistoric times for at least 2,000 years never reached the Andes.
Naturally, wheels and writing aren't directly linked to latitude and day
length in the way crops are. Instead, the links are indirect, especially via
food production systems and their consequences. The earliest wheels were
parts of ox-drawn carts used to transport agricultural produce. Early writ
ing was restricted to elites supported by food-producing peasants, and it
served purposes of economically and socially complex food-producing
societies (such as royal propaganda, goods inventories, and bureaucratic
record keeping). In general, societies that engaged in intense exchanges of
crops, livestock, and technologies related to food production were more
likely to become involved in other exchanges as well.
America's patriotic song "America the Beautiful" invokes our spacious
skies, our amber waves of grain, from sea to shining sea. Actually, that
song reverses geographic realities. As in Africa, in the Americas the spread
of native crops and domestic animals was slowed by constricted skies and
environmental barriers. No waves of native grain ever stretched from the
Atlantic to the Pacific coast of North America, from Canada to Patagonia,