400 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
ranean crops that became Egypt's staples require winter rains and seasonal
variation in day length for their germination. Those crops were unable to
spread south of the Sudan, beyond which they encountered summer rains
and little or no seasonal variation in daylight. Egypt's wheat and barley
never reached the Mediterranean climate at the Cape of Good Hope until
European colonists brought them in 1652, and the Khoisan never devel
oped agriculture. Similarly, the Sahel crops adapted to summer rain and to
little or no seasonal variation in day length were brought by the Bantu into
southern Africa but could not grow at the Cape itself, thereby halting the
advance of Bantu agriculture. Bananas and other tropical Asian crops for
which Africa's climate is eminently suitable, and which today are among
the most productive staples of tropical African agriculture, were unable to
reach Africa by land routes. They apparently did not arrive until the first
millennium A.D., long after their domestication in Asia, because they had
to wait for large-scale boat traffic across the Indian Ocean.
Africa's north-south axis also seriously impeded the spread of livestock.
Equatorial Africa's tsetse flies, carrying trypanosomes to which native Afri
can wild mammals are resistant, proved devastating to introduced Eur
asian and North African species of livestock. The cows that the Bantu
acquired from the tsetse-free Sahel zone failed to survive the Bantu expan
sion through the equatorial forest. Although horses had already reached
Egypt around 1800 B.C. and transformed North African warfare soon
thereafter, they did not cross the Sahara to drive the rise of cavalry-
mounted West African kingdoms until the first millennium A.D., and they
never spread south through the tsetse fly zone. While cattle, sheep, and
goats had already reached the northern edge of the Serengeti in the third
millennium B.C., it took more than 2,000 years beyond that for livestock
to cross the Serengeti and reach southern Africa.
Similarly slow in spreading down Africa's north-south axis was human
technology. Pottery, recorded in the Sudan and Sahara around 8000 B.C.,
did not reach the Cape until around A.D. 1. Although writing developed
in Egypt by 3000 B.C. and spread in an alphabetized form to the Nubian
kingdom of Meroe, and although alphabetic writing reached Ethiopia
(possibly from Arabia), writing did not arise independently in the rest of
Africa, where it was instead brought in from the outside by Arabs and
Europeans.
In short, Europe's colonization of Africa had nothing to do with differ-