1 22 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
that way. They're either hermaphrodites incapable of fertilizing themselves
and forced to interbreed with other hermaphrodite individuals (my male
part fertilizes your female part, your male part fertilizes my female part),
or else they occur as separate male and female individuals, like all normal
mammals. The former plants are termed self-incompatible hermaphro
dites; the latter, dioecious species. Both were bad news for ancient farmers,
who would thereby have promptly lost any favorable mutants without
understanding why.
The solution involved another type of invisible change. Numerous plant
mutations affect the reproductive system itself. Some mutant individuals
developed fruit without even having to be pollinated, resulting in our
seedless bananas, grapes, oranges, and pineapples. Some mutant hermaph
rodites lost their self-incompatibility and became able to fertilize them
selves—a process exemplified by many fruit trees such as plums, peaches,
apples, apricots, and cherries. Some mutant grapes that normally would
have had separate male and female individuals also became self-fertilizing
hermaphrodites. By all these means, ancient farmers, who didn't under
stand plant reproductive biology, still ended up with useful crops that bred
true and were worth replanting, instead of initially promising mutants
whose worthless progeny were consigned to oblivion.
Thus, farmers selected from among individual plants on the basis not
only of perceptible qualities like size and taste, but also of invisible features
like seed dispersal mechanisms, germination inhibition, and reproductive
biology. As a result, different plants became selected for quite different or
even opposite features. Some plants (like sunflowers) were selected for
much bigger seeds, while others (like bananas) were selected for tiny or
even nonexistent seeds. Lettuce was selected for luxuriant leaves at the
expense of seeds or fruit; wheat and sunflowers, for seeds at the expense
of leaves; and squash, for fruit at the expense of leaves. Especially instruc
tive are cases in which a single wild plant species was variously selected
for different purposes and thereby gave rise to quite different-looking
crops. Beets, grown already in Babylonian times for their leaves (like the
modern beet varieties called chards), were then developed for their edible
roots and finally (in the 18th century) for their sugar content (sugar beets).
Ancestral cabbage plants, possibly grown originally for their oily seeds,
underwent even greater diversification as they became variously selected
for leaves (modern cabbage and kale), stems (kohlrabi), buds (brussels
sprouts), or flower shoots (cauliflower and broccoli).
So far, we have been discussing transformations of wild plants into