6 8 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
relations was the first encounter between the Inca emperor Atahuallpa and
the Spanish conquistador Francisco Pizarro at the Peruvian highland town
of Cajamarca on November 16, 1532. Atahuallpa was absolute monarch
of the largest and most advanced state in the New World, while Pizarro
represented the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (also known as King
Charles I of Spain), monarch of the most powerful state in Europe.
Pizarro, leading a ragtag group of 168 Spanish soldiers, was in unfamiliar
terrain, ignorant of the local inhabitants, completely out of touch with the
nearest Spaniards (1,000 miles to the north in Panama) and far beyond the
reach of timely reinforcements. Atahuallpa was in the middle of his own
empire of millions of subjects and immediately surrounded by his army of
80,000 soldiers, recently victorious in a war with other Indians. Neverthe
less, Pizarro captured Atahuallpa within a few minutes after the two lead
ers first set eyes on each other. Pizarro proceeded to hold his prisoner
for eight months, while extracting history's largest ransom in return for a
promise to free him. After the ransom—enough gold to fill a room 22 feet
long by 17 feet wide to a height of over 8 feet—was delivered, Pizarro
reneged on his promise and executed Atahuallpa.
Atahuallpa's capture was decisive for the European conquest of the Inca
Empire. Although the Spaniards' superior weapons would have assured an
ultimate Spanish victory in any case, the capture made the conquest
quicker and infinitely easier. Atahuallpa was revered by the Incas as a sun-
god and exercised absolute authority over his subjects, who obeyed even
the orders he issued from captivity. The months until his death gave
Pizarro time to dispatch exploring parties unmolested to other parts of the
Inca Empire, and to send for reinforcements from Panama. When fighting
between Spaniards and Incas finally did commence after Atahuallpa's exe
cution, the Spanish forces were more formidable.
Thus, Atahuallpa's capture interests us specifically as marking the deci
sive moment in the greatest collision of modern history. But it is also of
more general interest, because the factors that resulted in Pizarro's seizing
Atahuallpa were essentially the same ones that determined the outcome of
many similar collisions between colonizers and native peoples elsewhere
in the modern world. Hence Atahuallpa's capture offers us a broad win
dow onto world history.
WHAT UNFOLDED THAT day at Cajamarca is well known, because it
was recorded in writing by many of the Spanish participants. To get a