FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY • 271
ances with all neighboring hamlets, regardless of whether the neighbors
were Fore or speakers of a different language.
Tribes, recently independent and now variously subordinated to
national states, still occupy much of New Guinea, Melanesia, and Ama
zonia. Similar tribal organization in the past is inferred from archaeologi
cal evidence of settlements that were substantial but lacked the
archaeological hallmarks of chiefdoms that I shall explain below. That
evidence suggests that tribal organization began to emerge around 13,000
years ago in the Fertile Crescent and later in some other areas. A prerequi
site for living in settlements is either food production or else a productive
environment with especially concentrated resources that can be hunted
and gathered within a small area. That's why settlements, and by inference
tribes, began to proliferate in the Fertile Crescent at that time, when cli
mate changes and improved technology combined to permit abundant har
vests of wild cereals.
Besides differing from a band by virtue of its settled residence and its
larger numbers, a tribe also differs in that it consists of more than one
formally recognized kinship group, termed clans, which exchange mar
riage partners. Land belongs to a particular clan, not to the whole tribe.
However, the number of people in a tribe is still low enough that everyone
knows everyone else by name and relationships.
For other types of human groups as well, "a few hundred" seems to be
an upper limit for group size compatible with everyone's knowing every
body. In our state society, for instance, school principals are likely to know
all their students by name if the school contains a few hundred children,
but not if it contains a few thousand children. One reason why the organi
zation of human government tends to change from that of a tribe to that
of a chiefdom in societies with more than a few hundred members is that
the difficult issue of conflict resolution between strangers becomes increas
ingly acute in larger groups. A fact further diffusing potential problems of
conflict resolution in tribes is that almost everyone is related to everyone
else, by blood or marriage or both. Those ties of relationships binding all
tribal members make police, laws, and other conflict-resolving institutions
of larger societies unnecessary, since any two villagers getting into an argu
ment will share many kin, who apply pressure on them to keep it from
becoming violent. In traditional New Guinea society, if a New Guinean
happened to encounter an unfamiliar New Guinean while both were away
from their respective villages, the two engaged in a long discussion of their