NECESSITY'S MOTHER • 2 47
A good illustration of the histories of trial and error involved is fur
nished by the development of gunpowder and gasoline from raw materials.
Combustible natural products inevitably make themselves noticed, as
when a resinous log explodes in a campfire. By 2000 B.c., Mesopotamians
were extracting tons of petroleum by heating rock asphalt. Ancient Greeks
discovered the uses of various mixtures of petroleum, pitch, resins, sulfur,
and quicklime as incendiary weapons, delivered by catapults, arrows,
firebombs, and ships. The expertise at distillation that medieval Islamic
alchemists developed to produce alcohols and perfumes also let them dis
till petroleum into fractions, some of which proved to be even more power
ful incendiaries. Delivered in grenades, rockets, and torpedoes, those
incendiaries played a key role in Islam's eventual defeat of the Crusaders.
By then, the Chinese had observed that a particular mixture of sulfur,
charcoal, and saltpeter, which became known as gunpowder, was espe
cially explosive. An Islamic chemical treatise of about A.D. 1100 describes
seven gunpowder recipes, while a treatise from A.D. 1280 gives more than
70 recipes that had proved suitable for diverse purposes (one for rockets,
another for cannons).
As for postmedieval petroleum distillation, 19th-century chemists
found the middle distillate fraction useful as fuel for oil lamps. The chem
ists discarded the most volatile fraction (gasoline) as an unfortunate waste
product—until it was found to be an ideal fuel for internal-combustion
engines. Who today remembers that gasoline, the fuel of modern civiliza
tion, originated as yet another invention in search of a use?
ONCE AN INVENTOR has discovered a use for a new technology, the
next step is to persuade society to adopt it. Merely having a bigger, faster,
more powerful device for doing something is no guarantee of ready accep
tance. Innumerable such technologies were either not adopted at all or
adopted only after prolonged resistance. Notorious examples include the
U.S. Congress's rejection of funds to develop a supersonic transport in
1971, the world's continued rejection of an efficiently designed typewriter
keyboard, and Britain's long reluctance to adopt electric lighting. What is
it that promotes an invention's acceptance by a society?
Let's begin by comparing the acceptability of different inventions within
the same society. It turns out that at least four factors influence acceptance.
The first and most obvious factor is relative economic advantage com-