YALI'S PEOPLE • 31 3
the Tasmanian archaeological record documents the disappearance of
fishing, and of awls, needles, and other bone tools, around 1500 B.c. On
at least three smaller islands (Flinders, Kangaroo, and King) that were iso
lated from Australia or Tasmania by rising sea levels around 10,000 years
ago, human populations that would initially have numbered around 200
to 400 died out completely.
Tasmania and those three smaller islands thus illustrate in extreme form
a conclusion of broad potential significance for world history. Human
populations of only a few hundred people were unable to survive indefi
nitely in complete isolation. A population of 4,000 was able to survive for
10,000 years, but with significant cultural losses and significant failures to
invent, leaving it with a uniquely simplified material culture. Mainland
Australia's 300,000 hunter-gatherers were more numerous and less iso
lated than the Tasmanians but still constituted the smallest and most iso
lated human population of any of the continents. The documented
instances of technological regression on the Australian mainland, and the
example of Tasmania, suggest that the limited repertoire of Native Austra
lians compared with that of peoples of other continents may stem in part
from the effects of isolation and population size on the development and
maintenance of technology—like those effects on Tasmania, but less
extreme. By implication, the same effects may have contributed to differ
ences in technology between the largest continent (Eurasia) and the next
smaller ones (Africa, North America, and South America).
WHY DIDN'T MORE-ADVANCED technology reach Australia from its
neighbors, Indonesia and New Guinea? As regards Indonesia, it was sepa
rated from northwestern Australia by water and was very different from it
ecologically. In addition, Indonesia itself was a cultural and technological
backwater until a few thousand years ago. There is no evidence of any
new technology or introduction reaching Australia from Indonesia, after
Australia's initial colonization 40,000 years ago, until the dingo appeared
around 1500 B.C.
The dingo reached Australia at the peak of the Austronesian expansion
from South China through Indonesia. Austronesians succeeded in settling
all the islands of Indonesia, including the two closest to Australia—Timor
and Tanimbar (only 275 and 205 miles from modern Australia, respec
tively). Since Austronesians covered far greater sea distances in the course