HOW CHINA BECAME CHINESE • 329
subequatorial Africa's original Pygmy and Khoisan languages by Bantu
languages.
Hence East Asia's linguistic upheavals raise a corresponding question:
what enabled Sino-Tibetan speakers to spread from North China to South
China, and speakers of Austroasiatic and the other original South China
language families to spread south into tropical Southeast Asia? Here, we
must turn to archaeology for evidence of the technological, political, and
agricultural advantages that some Asians evidently gained over other
Asians.
As
EVERYWHERE ELSE in the world, the archaeological record in East
Asia for most of human history reveals only the debris of hunter-gatherers
using unpolished stone tools and lacking pottery. The first East Asian evi
dence for something different comes from China, where crop remains,
bones of domestic animals, pottery, and polished (Neolithic) stone tools
appear by around 7500 B.C. That date is within a thousand years of the
beginning of the Neolithic Age and food production in the Fertile Cres
cent. But because the previous millennium in China is poorly known
archaeologically, one cannot decide at present whether the origins of Chi
nese food production were contemporaneous with those in the Fertile
Crescent, slightly earlier, or slightly later. At the least, we can say that
China was one of the world's first centers of plant and animal domestica
tion.
China may actually have encompassed two or more independent centers
of origins of food production. I already mentioned the ecological differ
ences between China's cool, dry north and warm, wet south. At a given
latitude, there are also ecological distinctions between the coastal lowlands
and the interior uplands. Different wild plants are native to these disparate
environments and would thus have been variously available to incipient
farmers in various parts of China. In fact, the earliest identified crops were
two drought-resistant species of millet in North China, but rice in South
China, suggesting the possibility of separate northern and southern centers
of plant domestication.
Chinese sites with the earliest evidence of crops also contained bones of
domestic pigs, dogs, and chickens. These domestic animals and crops were
gradually joined by China's many other domesticates. Among the animals,
water buffalo were most important (for pulling plows), while silkworms,