3 88 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
ation in day length. One set consists of plants whose ancestors are widely
distributed from west to east across the Sahel zone and were probably
domesticated there. They include, notably, sorghum and pearl millet,
which became the staple cereals of much of sub-Saharan Africa. Sorghum
proved so valuable that it is now grown in areas with hot, dry climates on
all the continents, including in the United States.
The other set consists of plants whose wild ancestors occur in Ethiopia
and were probably domesticated there in the highlands. Most are still
grown mainly just in Ethiopia and remain unknown to Americans—
including Ethiopia's narcotic chat, its banana-like ensete, its oily noog, its
finger millet used to brew its national beer, and its tiny-seeded cereal called
teff, used to make its national bread. But every reader addicted to coffee
can thank ancient Ethiopian farmers for domesticating the coffee plant. It
remained confined to Ethiopia until it caught on in Arabia and then
around the world, to sustain today the economies of countries as far-flung
as Brazil and Papua New Guinea.
The next-to-last set of African crops arose from wild ancestors in the
wet climate of West Africa. Some, including African rice, have remained
virtually confined there; others, such as African yams, spread throughout
other areas of sub-Saharan Africa; and two, the oil palm and kola nut,
reached other continents. West Africans were chewing the caffeine-con
taining nuts of the latter as a narcotic, long before the Coca-Cola Com
pany enticed first Americans and then the world to drink a beverage
originally laced with its extracts.
The last batch of African crops is also adapted to wet climates but pro
vides the biggest surprise of Figure 19.3. Bananas, Asian yams, and taro
were already widespread in sub-Saharan Africa in the 1400s, and Asian
rice was established on the coast of East Africa. But those crops originated
in tropical Southeast Asia. Their presence in Africa would astonish us, if
the presence of Indonesian people on Madagascar had not already alerted
us to Africa's prehistoric Asian connection. Did Austronesians sailing from
Borneo land on the East African coast, bestow their crops on grateful Afri
can farmers, pick up African fishermen, and sail off into the sunrise to
colonize Madagascar, leaving no other Austronesian traces in Africa?
The remaining surprise is that all of Africa's indigenous crops—those
of the Sahel, Ethiopia, and West Africa—originated north of the equator.
Not a single African crop originated south of it. This already gives us a