2 78 • GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
term a religion. Hawaiian chiefs were typical of chiefs elsewhere, in
asserting divinity, divine descent, or at least a hotline to the gods. The chief
claimed to serve the people by interceding for them with the gods and
reciting the ritual formulas required to obtain rain, good harvests, and
success in fishing.
Chiefdoms characteristically have an ideology, precursor to an institu
tionalized religion, that buttresses the chief's authority. The chief may
either combine the offices of political leader and priest in a single person,
or may support a separate group of kleptocrats (that is, priests) whose
function is to provide ideological justification for the chiefs. That is why
chiefdoms devote so much collected tribute to constructing temples and
other public works, which serve as centers of the official religion and visi
ble signs of the chief's power.
Besides justifying the transfer of wealth to kleptocrats, institutionalized
religion brings two other important benefits to centralized societies. First,
shared ideology or religion helps solve the problem of how unrelated indi
viduals are to live together without killing each other—by providing them
with a bond not based on kinship. Second, it gives people a motive, other
than genetic self-interest, for sacrificing their lives on behalf of others. At
the cost of a few society members who die in battle as soldiers, the whole
society becomes much more effective at conquering other societies or
resisting attacks.
THE POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, and social institutions most familiar to
us today are those of states, which now rule all of the world's land area
except for Antarctica. Many early states and all modern ones have had
literate elites, and many modern states have literate masses as well. Van
ished states tended to leave visible archaeological hallmarks, such as ruins
of temples with standardized designs, at least four levels of settlement
sizes, and pottery styles covering tens of thousands of square miles. We
thereby know that states arose around 3700 B.c. in Mesopotamia and
around 300 B.C. in Mesoamerica, over 2,000 years ago in the Andes,
China, and Southeast Asia, and over 1,000 years ago in West Africa. In
modern times the formation of states out of chiefdoms has been observed
repeatedly. Thus, we possess much more information about past states and
their formation than about past chiefdoms, tribes, and bands.
Protostates extend many features of large paramount (multivillage)